Trends in energy and charge transfer in 2D and integrated perovskite heterostructures  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR07141J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR07141J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 3610-3629Trends in energy and charge transfer in 2D and integrated perovskite heterostructures

        
          
            Sikandar 
            Aftab
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Zahir 
            Iqbal
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hosameldin Helmy 
            Hegazy
          
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Sikander 
            Azam
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Fahmid 
            Kabir
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Intelligent Mechatronics Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, South Korea. E-mail: aftab@sejong.ac.kr
bNanotechnology Research Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering Sciences, GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi 23640, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan
cSchool of Engineering Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6, Canada
dDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Riphah International University, I-14 Campus, Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan. E-mail: physics.sikandar@gmail.com
eResearch Center for Advanced Materials Science (RCAMS), King Khalid University, Abha 61413, P. O. Box 9004, Saudi Arabia
fDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, P.O. Box 9004, Abha, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      20th December 2022
    , Accepted 16th January 2023First published on 17th January 2023AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) heterostructured transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) open up new possibilities for a wide range of optoelectronic applications. Interlayer couplings are responsible for several fascinating physics phenomena, which are in addition to the multifunctionalities that have been discovered in the field of optoelectronics. These couplings can influence the overall charge, or the energy transfer processes via stacking, separation, and dielectric angles. This focused review article summarizes the most recent and promising strategies for interlayer exciton emission in 2D or integrated perovskites and TMD heterostructures. These types of devices require a thorough comprehension and effective control of interlayer couplings in order to realize their functionalities and improve performance, which is demonstrated in this article with the energy or charge transfer mechanisms in the individual devices. An ideal platform for examining the interlayer coupling and the related physical processes is provided by a summary of the recent research findings in 2D perovskites and TMDs. Furthermore, it would encourage more investigation into the comprehension and regulation of excitonic effects and the related optoelectronic applications in vdW heterostructures over a broad spectral response range. Finally, the current challenges and prospects are summarized in this paper.Sikandar AftabSikandar Aftab earned his Ph.D. in Physics from Department of Physics and Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University, South Korea. He also completed a two-year post-doctoral fellowship at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, Canada. Dr Aftab is currently employed as an Assistant Professor at Sejong University's Department of Intelligent Mechatronics Engineering in Seoul, South Korea. His research interests include nanodevices based on two-dimensional materials and heterostructures and solar cells.Muhammad Zahir IqbalMuhammad Zahir Iqbal received his Ph.D. from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain in 2014 and second PhD from Sejong University, Seoul, South Korea in 2014. Furthermore, he has done his post doctorate from Georgia State University, Atlanta, USA in 2015. Currently, Dr Iqbal is working as an Associate Professor at GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology. His research focus is 2D materials and heterostructures, optoelectronics and renewable energy.Hosameldin Helmy HegazyDr. Hosameldin Helmy Hegazy is currently working as an associate professor in the Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia. He earned his Ph.D. in Semiconductor Physics from Saint Petersburg Electrotechnical University “LETI,” Russia. His main scientific interests are fabrication, characterization, and applications for thin film photovoltaics, energy storage-related materials, and low-dimensional heterostructures.Sikander AzamSikander Azam received his Ph.D. from The University of West Bohemia, Czech Republic, in 2016. Furthermore, he has done his post doctorate from Ton Duc Thang University, Vietnam, in 2020. Currently, Dr Sikander is working as an Assistant Professor at Riphah International university, Pakistan. His research focus is 2D and 3D materials, optoelectronics, thermoelectric and renewable energy.Fahmid KabirFahmid Kabir is a third-year Ph.D. student in the School of Engineering Science at Simon Fraser University, Canada. He holds a B.Sc. degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology, Bangladesh and M.S. degree in Renewable Energy Technology from University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. His current research interests include 2D materials (TMD, MXene) based solar cells, and nanoelectronics.
1. Introduction
It is referred to as energy transfer whenever a donor and an acceptor exchange electronic excitation. This method has high energy conversion efficiency, because it does not experience emission or reabsorption events.1 There are two types of energy transfers, which include the Dexter type and the Förster type. The former relies on electron exchange in the system of molecular dyes. As a result, it can only function within a close proximity (1 nm), whereas the latter relies on dipole–dipole coupling. It can function over a reasonably long distance (r) with a dependency that is proportional to 1/r6.2–4 Several important optoelectronic applications, such as lasers,5 photovoltaic cells,6–10 LEDs,11–14 and a Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) have been extensively studied over the past three decades. These optoelectronic applications are well suited to the recently developed 2D vdW materials. The strong confinement and the lower dimensions in the 2D limit enable a more robust interaction and more obvious long-range features, which are a result of the fact that the dipole–dipole coupling strength is proportional to 1/r4 as opposed to 1/r6 in 3D confinement.15,16
2D materials, such as graphene (Gr), TMDs, and boron nitride (BN) provide a platform for studying fundamental physics in a single atomic layer limit.17–22 Monolayer TMDs have a large direct bandgap that spans the visible to the near-infrared (IR) spectrum, and they exhibit high stability. Monolayer TMDs exhibit strong excitonic emission with several hundred meV of binding energy even at room temperature, which is due to the lowered dielectric screening effect.23 It is possible to identify and manipulate trions or even biexcitons due to the excitonic species’ powerful many-body effect, which is highly sensitive to the doping level.24,25 More thrilling physics, such as spin-forbidden dark states26 and valleytronics,27 are made possible due to strong spin–orbit coupling and inversion symmetry breaking. TMD monolayer-based heterojunctions typically form type-II band alignment, which makes it simple to separate and accumulate optically excited electrons and holes in the opposing monolayers. The heterojunction structure has an ultrafast (>100 femtosecond) charge transfer process, which can be demonstrated by the pump–probe method.28–33 It is possible to produce an effective interlayer exciton with a longer lifetime and novel valleytronic properties by carefully stacking the appropriate materials, which include MoSe2 and WSe2.34,35
Another significant interaction between the semiconducting emitters is the energy transfer, which is in addition to charge transfer. It has received a lot less attention, but it is equally important in 2D material-based heterojunctions.36–44 FRET has been proven in MoSe2/WS2 (type-II) heterojunction using photoluminescence (PL) excitation spectroscopy.45 The pump–probe method has contrarily demonstrated that the energy transfer at the MoTe2/WSe2 interface is the Dexter type, which enables the transfer and contribution of the direct and indirect donor exciton to the acceptor emission.46 FRET has been demonstrated using 2D material heterojunctions, but it is essentially explained by a dipole–dipole coupling between excitons.45,47 Exciton, trion, and even biexciton emissions are among the diverse emission species that are present in 2D TMDs, which have a high intrinsic doping level and a reduced Coulomb screening effect. You must exercise extreme caution when interacting with the dynamics in 2D TMD heterojunctions, because different excitonic species have populations and lifetimes that are very different.25,48,49 If a direct interlayer charge transfer is severely inhibited, the energy transfer may take over as the predominant process. TMD layers can be separated using a BN insulating sheet in order to accomplish this.4,41 The excitation transfer mechanism can be switched from a direct charge transfer to an energy transfer by incorporating a different number of BN layers.4,41,47
Photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and 2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have garnered a lot of attention by considering their potential uses in lasers, which is due to the fact that they naturally have a tunable band gap, a high exciton binding energy, and multiple quantum well structures. Layered 2D perovskites has longer organic layers than 3D perovskites, which protect the inorganic layer from direct air contact. As a result, they are more environmentally stable.50 The band gap of 2D perovskite can additionally be easily adjusted over a more comprehensive range, which is beneficial for optoelectronics applications. This can be accomplished by changing the number of layers and the chemical compositions.51 A crucial aspect of 2D perovskites is that they are layered, which enables us to separate the tiny flakes from their bulk forms and combine them with other non-layered materials in order to attain the required functionalities.52 It has also been noted that quasi-2D perovskites exhibit an energy transfer at vdW interfaces. These substances display organic layers that act as insulators between the atomically thin semiconducting inorganic layers. A dipole–dipole energy transfer has been seen with stacks of 2D perovskite material with varying quantum well thicknesses.53 It was discovered in another study that the radiative energy transfer occurred more quickly than 50 ps within the heterostructures of two distinct species of the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite.54 It is hypothesized that in these material systems, the organic insulating layers block interlayer charge transfer enables the energy transfer to happen with high efficiencies.
Doping with metal cations and the modification of organic ligands are techniques that are used in perovskites in order to increase the emission efficiency of the self-trapped excitons.55–57 However, both strategies call for a challenging chemical procedure. It is possible to produce self-trapped exciton emissions in 2D lead halide perovskites by distorting the crystal structures.58 Effective strategies need to be developed in order to increase the amount of emission that is produced by self-trapped excitons in 2D perovskites. This would be beneficial for the development of potential optoelectronic applications. This issue can be remedied by increasing the self-trapped exciton emission in integrated 2D and quantum dot perovskite heterostructures. This will allow for an increase in the amount of the interfacial excitonic energy transfer.59–61 A practical and easy-to-use technique that can be used in order to improving the self-trapped exciton emission efficiency in perovskites will be helpful for 2D perovskite-based light emitting devices.62,63
New doors have been opened for a wide variety of applications that involve optoelectronics due to the development of TMDs and vdW heterostructured 2D materials. Interlayer couplings in the field of optoelectronics have led to some fascinating physics concepts and multifunctionalities. These couplings can affect the charge or energy transfer processes as a whole by stacking, separating, and manipulating dielectric angles.4 This article provides a focused review that summarizes the most recent and promising strategies for interlayer exciton emission in 2D or integrated perovskites and TMD heterostructures. Investigating interlayer coupling and other physically related phenomena in 2D TMDs and perovskites is made possible by the most current research breakthroughs. In addition, it would encourage more research into the optoelectronic applications and excitonic effects in vdW heterostructures across a broad spectrum. Finally, the challenges and prospects are summarized in this paper. Fig. 1 depicts the various strategies for transferring energy or a charge in 2D or integrated perovskites heterostructures.
 Fig. 1  (a) The transferring of energy and photogating in WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction. Adapted with permission.4 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Defect-accelerated energy transfer imaging within MoS2/BN/WS2. Adapted with permission.64 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Heterostructure engineering to manipulate 2D charge and energy transfer. Adapted with permission.41 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Carrier excitation from mid-gap defect states in BN to WSe2. Adapted with permission.65 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Interlayer coupling in (iso-BA)2PbI4/WSe2 heterostructures. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Exciton transfer in Quasi-2D WS2/PEPI. Adapted with permission.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Energy and charge transfer in WS2/(PEA)2PbI4. Adapted with permission.67 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Interlayer excitons that carry momentum in WSe2/(iso-BA)2PbI4. Adapted with permission.68 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (h) In 2D/QD Perovskite heterostructures, improving self-trapped exciton emission. Adapted with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (i) Excitons from WS2 and PbI2 nanostructures in the visible region. Adapted with permission.69 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
2. Energy and charge transfer in 2D TMDs
2.1 The transferring of energy and the photogating effect in a WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction
Interlayer couplings have recently been used as a platform for the production of fascinating physics concepts and multifunctional optoelectronic properties in vdW 2D layered heterostructures. These couplings can be rationally controlled by stacking angles, dielectric, and adjusting the separation, which all affect the overall energy or charge-transfer processes and the development of the prospective landscape for twistronics.4 They represent the results of the time-resolved and the steady-state optical spectroscopy measurements of the effective FRET in WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterostructure. They were able to explain how free electrons and the electron–hole pairs from the trions that evolved, and they discovered that 59.9% of the electron–hole pairs were able to transfer into MoSe2 by FRET channels (38 picoseconds), whereas the free electrons accumulated at the WS2/BN interface in order to photogate MoSe2. This study provides a comprehensive understanding of the FRET process in 2D TMD heterojunctions, which provides the groundwork for the development of the associated heterojunction optoelectronic devices by providing a scientific foundation for their creation.
The schematic representation of FRET and photogating in the WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction is shown in Fig. 2a. The models shown in Fig. 2 are realistic for three different scenarios, which are according to the optical spectroscopy and the transport measurements that were performed. Three steps are involved in the dynamics of the WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2 heterojunction, which include (I) the generation of trions in WS2 in less than 2 picoseconds in response to the optical pumping, (II) recombination between the electron–hole pairs occurs in 40.1% of all trions in a period of 57 picoseconds, and (III) the majority of the electron–hole pairs, which included 59.9%, were able to tunnel into MoSe2 by utilizing FRET in approximately 38 picoseconds, which is illustrated in Fig. 2b. The photogate comprises of the electrons that are produced in step (II) that have accumulated at the WS2/BN interface. The laser excitation in BN/1L-MoSe2 only induces excitons and trions, which is shown in Fig. 2c. Exciton-dominated emission is seen in the PL spectrum. This is a result of the optically generated electrons accumulating at the WS2/BN interface in the ML-WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2 and gating the MoSe2, which is depicted in Fig. 2d.
 Fig. 2  (a) A representation of FRET and photogating in a WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction. The above WS2 bandgap excitation is used to illustrate various heterojunctions in schematic band diagrams in addition to the dynamic processes. (b) 1L-WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2, (c) BN/1L-MoSe2, and (d) ML-WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2. Panel (a) to panel (d) were adapted with permission from the publisher.4 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Defect-accelerated energy transfer imaging within MoS2/BN/WS2
The investigation of new optoelectronic devices heavily rely on engineering the energy transfer (ET). Several techniques, which include stacking angle, distance, and dielectric properties, have effectively controlled the efficient energy transfer.64 However, these strategies have limited regulatory freedom. For example, the defect type and density can result in more degrees of freedom. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy is used in this study in order to directly observe the defect-accelerated atomic-scale energy transfer in MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures. Controlling the duration of oxygen plasma irradiation results in introducing sulfur vacancies with various densities. This research demonstrates that the energy transfer rate can be increased by controlling the defect density from 1.25 to 6.58 ns−1. In addition, the time required for this process has been reduced from 0.80 ns to 0.15 ns, which is a result of an increase in the number of neutral excitons that are involved in the energy transfer process. These neutral excitons in MoS2 can transform into trion excitons with the assistance of oxygen substitution at sulfur vacancies. These discoveries improved the comprehension of how defects affect the energy transfer process as well as offer a fresh method for engineering an energy transfer, which will allow us to investigate new optoelectronic devices in vdW heterostructures in greater detail.
The schematic atomic structure of MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures is shown in Fig. 3a. There is an insulating BN barrier made up of a few layers that are sandwiched in between the bottom WS2 and top MoS2 layer. The MoS2/BN/WS2 region yields all the Raman characteristic peaks, which indicates that the preparation of MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures was successful. It is interesting to note that the MoS2/WS2 and MoS2/BN/WS2 regions significantly enhance the Raman intensity of the WS2 A1g mode. This is illustrated by the color contrast of the WS2 A1g mode Raman intensity mappings, which is shown in Fig. 3b. It has been reported that interlayer coupling and the WS2 A1 g mode's enhanced intensity are closely related to layer thickness.70,71 This finding implies that there is strong interlayer coupling in the MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructure when it is in its prepared state. The PL spectra, which is like the Raman results, show the MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructure's strong interlayer coupling, which is shown in Fig. 3c. The emission peak in MoS2 is 1.86 eV, and the emission peak in WS2 is 2.01 eV, which was expected.72 The MoS2/WS2 region interestingly exhibits a clear PL quenching, which denotes a robust charge transfer.73 The PL in the MoS2/BN/WS2 region more intriguingly exhibits a significant PL enhancement of 10 times at the energy of 2.01 eV (WS2) as opposed to quenching. This result is consistent with the earlier findings, and it shows a strong ET from MoS2 to WS2.47 The dipole–dipole coupling of the low population neutral excitons allows them to participate in the energy transfer process prior to plasma treatment, which is demonstrated on the left side of Fig. 3d. Continuous oxygen plasma irradiation introduces sulfur vacancy defects in MoS2. More neutral excitons, which were once trion excitons, are produced when negative charges are depleted by the oxygen adsorbing on the vacancy sites at this point, which is shown on the right side of Fig. 3d. The neutral excitons are the dominant population, so they take part in the energy transfer process, which is demonstrated on the right side of Fig. 3d. Neutral excitons are created more often when the defect density rises, which contributes to the acceleration of the energy transfer process.
 Fig. 3  (a) A schematic depicts the atomic structure of MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures. A few-layer insulating BN barrier is sandwiched between the top-layer MoS2 and bottom-layer WS2. (b) Raman mapping of MoS2/BN/WS2, MoS2/WS2 heterostructures and WS2. (c) PL spectra from the MoS2, WS2, MoS2/WS2, and MoS2/BN/WS2 regions at 532 nm excitation. (d) The defect-accelerated ET process's mechanism in MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures is depicted in a schematic diagram. All the above are adapted with permission from the publisher.64 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 2D charge and energy transfer using heterostructure engineering
The widespread use of 2D vdW heterostructures can be attributed to these structures’ electrical and optical characteristics. The interlayer couplings in these devices must be thoroughly understood and effectively controlled in order to realize these devices’ functionalities and enhance their performance. It was revealed that varying the stacking layers of Gr, BN, and WS2 allowed for the manipulation of the interlayer charge transfer between 2D materials. Gr and WS2 both alter their doping levels under visible-light excitation with a shift in the Fermi level in Gr of up to 120 meV and a net electron accumulation in WS2. The modulation illustrated to be the consequence of the simultaneous manipulation of the energy and/or charge transfer between each neighboring layer by using a combination of micro-Raman and PL spectroscopy.
The configuration of the heterostructure is shown schematically in Fig. 4a. In order to create a heterostructure with three distinct regions, they are referred to as Gr/BN, Gr/BN/WS2, and BN/WS2. The atomically thin 2D layers, such as Gr, few-layer (5–8 nm) BN, and 1L-WS2 were mechanically exfoliated and stacked one on top of the other in an inert environment. Fig. 4b shows a prepared optical image of a typical sample with distinct layers and intersecting sections. The WS2 PL spectra were then measured in various regions, which are depicted in Fig. 4c and d. The measured exciton (X) near 2.01 eV and trion (X−) near 1.96 eV are quenched by a factor of 2 to 3 at the Gr/BN/WS2 region compared to the BN/WS2 region. The exciton peak, which exhibits about a 15-fold difference between these two regions, is at a lower temperature of 77 K, and they observed stronger PL quenching and more clearly resolved X and X− peaks. The Raman A1g mode variation in the Gr/BN/WS2 section and the significant PL quenching strongly suggest a change in the top WS2's charge carrier density.29,74 Therefore, the bottom Gr significantly affects the top WS2 and vice versa by being separated by a small layer of BN. They believe that using different heterostacking structures between 2D atomic layers will make it possible to effectively manipulate the transfer of energy or the charge. Fig. 4e illustrates how the Gr/BN heterojunction can be photoinduced with electron doping, which leads to the observed undoping of the Gr. This is made possible by the presence of the BN defect states. The transport measurements showed that in BN, the photoexcited defect states dope Gr with electrons.75,76 According to the earlier theoretical and experimental reports, the defect excited states and the defect ground for this defect state are located at 3.9 eV and 1.95 above the valence band, respectively.77 The top WS2 layer will then align with the defect ground and the defect excited states in order to form a type-II band, which is shown in Fig. 4f. The excited electrons will continue to transfer to the Gr side, which is due to the larger energy gap between the defect excited state and the WS2 conduction band. However, the defect ground state facilitates the hole transfer from WS2 to BN, because it is situated between the Gr Fermi level and the WS2 valence band. A type-I band alignment is created between the BN defect states and Gr, so the accumulated holes in BN will transfer to Gr. The electron transfer, which they covered in more depth, is another factor that confirms the balanced nature of the stimulated hole transfer. According to the efficient interlayer energy transfer between BN and Gr, which is powered by the balanced charge flow, there is no net charge flow from BN to Gr. It has been noted that Gr and the TMD monolayer have a similar effect.74
 Fig. 4  (a) An illustration of the Gr/h-BN/WS2 heterostructure. (b) An optical image of a representative sample was taken immediately after fabrication. The spectra of the steady-state PL Gr/BN/WS2 and BN/WS2 at temperatures of (c) 300 K and (d) 77 K. The trion and exciton peaks in WS2 are represented by the symbols X− and X. (e)The band alignment Gr/BN and (f) the charge transfer at the Gr/BN/WS2 interfaces. Panel (a) to panel (f) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.41 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Carrier excitation from mid-gap defect states in BN to WSe2
A conventional mechanical exfoliation method was utilized in order to produce the ultrathin BN and WSe2 nanoflakes, which an adhesive tape was used in the process. The dry transfer technique was used in order to create stacked BN/WSe2 heterostructures. The field-effect transistors (FETs)78 are constructed on the BN/WSe2 heterostructure as an optical microscopy image, which is shown in Fig. 5a. The transfer characteristics are shown in Fig. 5b, which confirmed the p-type behavior of the pure p-type WSe2, and showed that it mainly exhibited this behavior. A photoinduced doping effect is attained by shining 5.6 eV photons at a gate voltage of 20 V for 5 minutes on the BN/p-WSe2 heterostructure. The applied gate voltage (Vlightg) or the back-gate voltage creates the photoinduced doping effect when deep UV or visible light is illuminated. The transfer characteristics, which are shown in Fig. 5b, confirmed that the doped WSe2 flakes exhibited n-type behavior. The photoinduced electron doping mechanism in the heterostructures of BN and WSe2 flakes is caused by the optical excitation of mid-defect states or the gap donor-like states in BN when it is under illumination. The photoinduced effect of the carrier modulation in the heterostructures of WSe2 and BN is illustrated in Fig. 5c and d, which show the underlying physical mechanism. Deep UV photons can create donor-like defect states in the BN.76 The incident photon energy causes the electrons in the mid-gap defect states to become excited, which is also known as triggered, and move into the conduction band when the BN is exposed to deep UV light. The WSe2 flake's negative gate voltage allows the photon-excited electrons to enter. The impact of an external electric field on the BN, specifically the photoinduced effect, is mitigated due to the localized and positively charged ionized defects. This procedure is repeated until there are no more positively ionized defects inside the BN or an external electric field across it.76 The BN retains these positively charged defects even after light and the Vg are turned off, which causes a stabilized doping effect in WSe2. Similar technique of charge transfer from defect states was reported in various works. A similar technique of charge transfer from defect states in BN has been reported in several papers.79
 Fig. 5  (a) An optical representation of a BN/WSe2 FET device. (b) Transfer properties of doped and undoped BN/WSe2 FETs with a 5-min light pulse (incident photons energy = 5.6 eV). (c) Schematic diagram of photoinduced doping mechanism. It excites electrons in defect states when light strikes a BN material. The photoexcited electron enters the WSe2 flake when it is exposed to light via a photoinduced gate voltage. (d) Photoinduced doping creates a donor-like state in the middle of BN transform into positively charged defects. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.65 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
2.5 Mid-IR photodetection using interlayer excitons in 2D heterostructures
The variety of readily available materials and the challenging crystal growth process are the main constraints on developing infrared photodetectors. The typical III–V and II–VI semiconductors’ thermally activated carriers also force IR photodetectors to function at low temperatures. It is illustrated in this paper that interlayer excitons that are produced in WS2/HfS2 enabled IR photodetection. The photodetector can function when the temperature is at room temperature, but it demonstrates an even greater level of performance when the temperature is increased. This is due to the optical transition's phonon-assisted nature and the substantial exciton binding energy. The WS2/HfS2 heterostructure's unique band alignment enables the tuning of the interlayer bandgap in the mid-to-long-wave IR spectrum. They hypothesized that a considerable increase in the interlayer exciton oscillator strength and a high photodetector responsiveness are caused by the significant charge delocalization and the interlayer exciton buildup at the interface. An excellent platform for the realization of reliable tunable room temperature IR photodetectors is provided by the interlayer excitons’ sensitivity to the thickness of 2D materials and the external field.
The heterostructure's photoresponse was investigated under a 532 nm laser illumination in order to confirm the interfacial band bending. Fig. 6a provides a schematic representation of the device that was used in this study. The I–V curves for varied excitation powers are shown in Fig. 6b. The direction of the photocurrent and the photovoltage correlates with the band structure at the interface, because the metal-TMD junction generates an ohmic contact, which is virtually at a zero voltage. The photocurrent shifts the I–V curve into the second quadrant. This suggests that the carriers build up close to the junction as opposed to being depleted, which is the case in a typical p–n diode. It has been experimentally demonstrated that band bending is possible at the heterostructure junction of 2D materials.80–82 The relative Fermi energy level and the junctional carrier concentration both impact the band bending at the heterostructure junction. The degree of band bending is anticipated to be similar in both cases with a narrower depletion width in 3L-HfS2 than in bulk HfS2, which is illustrated in Fig. 6c, if they assume that the EF for 3L and bulk HfS2 are similar. They performed a theoretical calculation in order to establish the band-bending diagram by self-consistently calculating the charge density and the potential in real space, which the results are shown in Fig. 6d for 3L, 5L WS2, and 7L-HfS2. The modification of the band bending was caused by the application of an external bias. The CBM barely varies with thickness, so lowering the bandgap in bulk HfS2 is predominantly seen as an upward shift of the HfS2 VBM. They assume in this model that the band bending in monolayer WS2 is negligible or nonexistent, because it is physically impractical. The model unequivocally demonstrates that the depletion width increases with the number of HfS2 layers. The junction mentioned above serves as a trap for the interlayer excitons at the heterostructure interface, and it results in their accumulation, which is shown in Fig. 6c.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of an exfoliated WS2 flake with a variable number of HfS2 layers on a doped silicon substrate, which Vg was used in order to regulate the interlayer bandgap and the band alignment and Vds was used for the charge extraction when the device was used as a photodetector. (b) WS2/bulk-HfS2 and WS2/3L-HfS2 heterostructure I–V curves at various excitation powers. The curves shift to the second quadrant with increased power, which indicates more charge carrier accumulation at the interface. (c) An illustration of band bending at the interface. It was assumed that as the number of layers increased, only the VBM of HfS2 shifted relative to the VBM of WS2, which is due to the relatively small shift in CBM indicated by the calculation. All the measurements were conducted at room temperature, and a 2.33 eV energy center laser was used to excite the photons. (d) The band profiles of the heterojunctions 1L-WS2/3L, 5L, and 7L-HfS2 at zero bias (Vg = 0). The vacuum level (Evac = 0 eV) was chosen as the energy reference. The grey areas indicate the spaces between WS2 and HfS2, and an EF line with a black dash is plotted. The black dots indicate the locations of the atoms in the out-of-plane direction. WS2 has a slight n doping with an EF of 0.15 eV above the intrinsic EF (Eg = 1.82 eV). Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.83 Copyright 2020, Nature Portfolio. 
3. Energy and charge transfer in integrated 2D and perovskites heterostructures
3.1 Interlayer excitons in WSe2/(iso-BA)2PbI4
Type-II vdW heterostructures are ideal for excitonic and optoelectronic devices, which is due to their oriented permanent dipole moment and long lifetime. However, it has been discovered that the geometric misalignment and lattice mismatch between the constituent layers have a significant impact on the interlayer exciton emission, which is based on the extensive research that has been conducted on the heterostructures of TMDs. The process of fabricating the device has become more complicated as a consequence. The reliable momentum-indirect interlayer excitons emission in 2D perovskite and TMD vdW heterostructures is reported in this study. These heterostructures were created without considering either the momentum mismatch or the orientation arrangement. The interlayer excitons have a high diffusion coefficient of 10 cm2 s−1, and the interlayer exciton emission energy can be easily tuned between 1.3 and 1.6 eV by varying the thickness of the TMD flakes or even the number of layers in the 2D perovskite. This sheds light on how vdW interface engineering can be applied to broad-spectrum optoelectronics. A typical WSe2/2D perovskite vdW heterostructure is depicted in Fig. 7a as a schematic representation. This heterostructure consists of a WSe2 flake being stacked on a 2D perovskite microplate. According to the earlier research, the organic ligands did not affect how the 2D perovskite and WSe2 bands align.66 A typical 2D perovskite (iso-BA)2PbI4, which will hereafter be referred to as PbI4, where iso-BA is isobutylamine and has the chemical formula C4H9NH3+ was consequently chosen in order to study interlayer exciton in their WSe2/PbnI3n+1 vdW heterostructures. The optical image of a typical WSe2/PbI4 vdW heterostructure is shown in Fig. 7b. Fig. 7c shows the band alignments of 1L-WSe2/PbI4, and Fig. 7d shows the band alignments of 2L-WSe2/PbI4. The direct-band-gap semiconductor PbI4 has a CBM and VBM that both are situated at the same point Γ in momentum space.84 The CBM and VBM of 1L-WSe2, which is a direct-band-gap semiconductor, are both located at the K point, whereas the CBM and VBM of 2L-WSe2, which is an indirect-band-gap semiconductor, are both situated at the Γ point.84 The VBM of 2L-WSe2 is allegedly located near the K point, which has no influence on the analysis for interlayer excitons. Therefore, the holes that would reside at the point of PbI4, and the electrons would accumulate in WSe2 at the K point for PbI4/1L when PbI4 is layered with monolayer, bilayer, or 2L WSe2 in order to generate vdW heterostructures under excitation. Therefore, the holes would reside at the point of PbI4 when PbI4 is stacked with monolayer or bilayer or 2L WSe2 in order to form vdW heterostructures under excitation, and the electrons would gather in WSe2 at the K point for PbI4/1L. The momentum-indirect interlayer excitons should form due to this, which is shown in Fig. 7c and d. They conducted PL studies at 78 K, which is shown in Fig. 7e, for both heterostructures. The emission of WSe2 in the 1L-WSe2/PbI4 heterostructure is significantly reduced under 633 nm laser excitation due to the charge transfer. However, a wide emission peak at 1.58 eV was identified as the interlayer exciton emission, which is based on the prior studies.66 A new wide peak is seen at 1.44 eV, but the indirect-band-gap emission of WSe2 in the 2L-WSe2/PbI4 heterostructure is also completely quenched. They infer that this new peak is an interlayer exciton emission by comparing it to the PL spectrum of 1L-WSe2/PbI4 and by using the band alignment in Fig. 7d. Also, 2L WSe2's K–K transition can be seen near 1.7 eV.
 Fig. 7  (a) An illustration of 1L and 2L heterostructures composed of WSe2/PbI4. (b) An image obtained from an optical microscope shows 1L and 2L heterostructures composed of WSe2/PbI4. The white scale bar is 20 μm. The band alignment of the (c) 1L and (d) 2L WSe2/PbI4 heterostructures. The black arrows depict the hole transfer from WSe2 to PbI4. (e) The PL spectra that have been normalized and taken from 1L and 2L heterostructures of WSe2/PbI4, which are abbreviated as HS. A laser with a wavelength of 405 nm was used to excite PbI4 (3.06 eV), whereas a laser with a wavelength of 633 nm was used to excite bare WSe2 and heterostructures (1.96 eV). The temperature that was used for the PL measurements was 78 K. Panel (a) to panel (e) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.68 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (f) DFT calculations for band alignment of a heterostructure constructed from WS2/PEPI. The pathways for the energy and charge transfer are displayed. (g) A WS2/PEPI heterostructure with BN capping layers is visible under an optical microscope. The color spectra shown in the panels below correspond to the color points on the image. (h) The PEPI absorption band is excited below (540 nm) in the PL spectra of WS2. (i) The PL spectra of PEPI that were excited above the absorption band of PEPI (488 nm). All spectra were recorded at T = 5 K. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.67 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
There is currently a lot of study on vdW heterostructures, which is partly due to the absolute relaxation of the lattice matching criteria that enables the previously unheard-of freedom as well as their unique and exotic features when compared to the individual layers. The subject of this investigation is the hybrid TMD WS2/2D perovskite (PEA)2PbI4 (PEPI) heterostructure, which PEA stands for phenylethylammonium. The first DFT calculations of a heterostructure ensemble were reported and show that the organic spacer of the 2D perovskite inhibits direct electron transport in this new band alignment. The valence band contrarily causes a cascade that allows holes to migrate from the WS2 layer through the PEA layer and onto the PbI4 layer. These predictions are supported by the optical spectroscopy studies that provide solid evidence for nonradiative transmission of excitation between the layers, which is an energy transfer, as well as a charge transfer. These findings demonstrate that TMD/2D perovskite heterostructures offer a flexible and practical method for engineering the band alignment. As a result, stacking WS2 with PEPI produces the novel band diagram, which is shown in Fig. 7f, and only the holes can be transferred directly between the layers. The perovskite layer and the TMD layer should additionally be able to transfer energy more efficiently, which is due to their proximity and strong excitonic effects that are measured by the oscillator strength in both materials. The WS2/PEPI stack, which is mounted on a Si/SiO2 substrate and enclosed in BN in order to provide the maximum level of optical quality and stability, has undergone optical studies in order to support theoretical predictions. Fig. 7g depicts the sample's optical microscope image. The bare Ruddlesden-Popper perovskite PEPI region, the bare monolayer WS2, and the WS2/PEPI heterostructure area can all be distinguished. The triangular WS2 flake's sides measurement is 20 μm, and the perovskite area is nearly 20 × 20 μm2 in size. The A- and B-excitons, which result from the spin–orbit splitting in the valence band, give the WS2 monolayers their distinctive optical properties. Only the A-exciton is typically seen in the emission, which is due to the valence band's significant splitting (400 meV). The bare flake and the heterostructure region are shown in Fig. 7h's representative PL spectra that is related to the WS2 emission at a temperature of 5 K. The free exciton (X), trion (T), and localized excitons (L) can each be attributed to three distinct emission features that are distinctive for an A-exciton emission.85 The PL from WS2 was obtained, which is shown in Fig. 7i, by using 540 nm excitation, which is below the PEPI's absorption band, but the spectra of the heterostructure and the bare WS2 flake are different. The trion-to-exciton ratio rises from 1.2 on a naked flake to 2 in the presence of a heterostructure. The heterostructure's WS2 trion and exciton emission additionally have a lower overall intensity than a bare flake. This finding provides experimental evidence for the theoretically predicted hole transfer from the WS2 layer to the PbI4 slab. The effective hole transfer contributes to a reduction in the PL intensity that was observed throughout the heterostructure region. In addition, the trion has a negative charge, because the WS2 layer has an inherent n-type character.86,87 An increase in the ratio of the electron concentration to the hole concentration in the heterostructure is caused by the photoinduced hole transfer from WS2 to the PEPI layer. This is shown as an increase in the T/X emission ratio. A strong PL emission can be seen around 2.34 eV, which is depicted in Fig. 7i, when the sample is excited above the absorption band of PEPI (488 nm laser), which corresponds to the predominant free exciton emission of PEPI.88,89 The isolated flake's PEPI PL signal is stronger than the heterostructure regions. On the other hand, the low intensity in the heterostructure section cannot be attributed to a direct charge/exciton transfer to the WS2 layer when the predicted band alignment is considered. The decreased PL intensity may accordingly be a sign of energy being transferred from the PEPI layer to the WS2 layer. However, it is difficult to determine whether the WS2 emission is increased in the heterostructure region, which was anticipated in the case of an energy transfer from PEPI, solely by using a single 488 nm excitation wavelength for the PL measurement. This is because the PL measurement only takes into account one wavelength.
3.2 Interlayer coupling in (iso-BA)2PbI4/WSe2 heterostructures
Interlayer excitons in monolayer TMD heterobilayers have garnered a lot of attention, because they have a relatively long lifetime. This property is advantageous for a wide variety of applications that involve optoelectronics. Most of the research on interlayer excitons in TMD heterobilayers up to this point has focused on the geometrical organization of the structures, interlayer valley excitons, and spin valley lifetime with interlayer hopping rules.66 The fact that interlayer excitons strongly depend on coupling strength and the local atomic registry in TMD heterobilayers makes it more difficult to fabricate the device. The interlayer exciton emission was very clearly articulated in integrated 2D TMD, and the perovskite heterostructures were reported in this study. This was accomplished without the use of any specific geometric configurations or the application of thermal annealing. Interlayer exciton emission can be considered to be fairly typical for both 2D perovskites and 1L-TMDs. The emission spectrum is completely dominated at 78 K by this type of interlayer exciton emission, and this is true regardless of the order that the layers are stacked. This would indicate that the interlayer coupling in heterostructures of 1L-TMD and 2D perovskite is quite strong. In addition, the interlayer exciton emission exhibits that increasing laser intensity causes a significant blue shift, which can persist above 220 K due to the repulsive dipole–dipole interaction. The interlayer exciton emission in chiral 2D perovskite and 1L-WSe2 heterostructures also demonstrates circular solid polarization. This is significant, because it has the potential to control the valley degree of freedom for valleytronic devices. These findings would provide researchers with a good starting point in order to investigate the associated physical processes and interlayer coupling in 2D perovskites and TMDs. It would also encourage further studies into the comprehension and control of excitonic phenomena and related optoelectronic applications in vdW heterostructures throughout a wide range of spectrum response.

Fig. 8a depicts the representation of the crystal structures, and the 2D perovskite microplate is positioned on top of a 1L-TMD. The previous studies showed that organic ligands do not significantly alter the electronic band structure of 2D perovskites.90 All of the 2D perovskites they used, which include (S-MBA)2PbI4 (MBA = C6H5C2H4NH3, (BA)2PbI4 (BA = C4H9NH3), and (iso-BA)2PbI4, correspond to the type II band alignment. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that the band alignment of 2D perovskites and 1L-WSe2 will be comparable, which is shown in Fig. 8b. The photogenerated electrons and holes in the layer are efficiently separated when the WSe2 layer is exposed to a laser with a wavelength of 633 nm. They then reside in the WSe2 layer and the 2D perovskite layer. They believe that interlayer excitons will form in these vertically stacked heterostructures, which is due to the absence of dangling bonds at the interface and the atomically sharp interface that is based on the layered nature of both 2D perovskite and the WSe2 layers. Fig. 8c depicts the PL spectra of the individual (iso-BA)2PbI4 (top), WSe2 (bottom), and the heterostructure region. The constituent (iso-BA)2PbI4 microplate only has a free exciton emission peak, but the constituent WSe2 layer exhibits both a charge exciton (X−) and neutral exciton (X0) emission peaks. Only a free exciton emission peak is present in the constituent (iso-BA)2PbI4 microplate, but both a charge exciton and neutral exciton emission peaks can be undoubtedly seen in the constituent WSe2 layer.25 Both of these peaks are clearly visible. According to the band alignment in Fig. 8c, the interlayer excitons should be in charge of the heterostructure region's wide emission. This is due to the peak energy of the interlayer excitons being in agreement with the energy extracted from the interlayer exciton level.
 Fig. 8  (a) A representation of a monolayer TMD and 2D perovskite. (b) The band alignment of WSe2 and 2D perovskite (iso-BA)2PbI4 heterostructure forms a type-II heterostructure with an interlayer exciton emission when excited by a laser at 633 nm. (c) The PL spectra of the (iso-BA)2PbI4 microplate are displayed in the top section, the heterostructure is displayed in the middle section, and the monolayer WSe2 is displayed in the bottom section. All three panels were subjected to laser excitation at 633 nm with a power of 377 μW. Panel (a) to panel (c) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Exciton transfer in Quasi-2D WS2/PEPI
A re-emerging material called quasi-2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite has strongly excitonic emission and absorption properties, which makes it an attractive candidate for optoelectronics and photonics. An experimental demonstration of the excitonic energy transfer in vdW heterostructures made from monolayer WS2 and quasi-2D hybrid perovskite (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 (PEPI) is presented. Perovskite is distinguished by a property that is known as ground exciton resonance, which is clearly visible in PL excitation spectroscopy, and it provides evidence of an energy transfer from perovskite to WS2. Unforeseen high PL enhancement factors were discovered, which were up to a maximum of 8, that defy the single-interface energy transfer explanation. According to an analysis, the interlayer energy transfer contributes to the significant enhancement factor across most of the layered perovskite. Furthermore, they concluded that the Förster-type mechanism based on the lower-limit energy transfer rate's weak temperature dependence, which they found to be 3 ns−1.
A PEPI/WS2 heterostructure is schematically depicted in Fig. 9a. The heterostructure was created using a PDMS stamp, and the monolayer WS2 was transferred onto a PEPI flake using the dry transfer method.91 Annealing was avoided in order to stop the perovskite from degrading at high temperatures.92 The optical image of the heterostructures with a thickness that was almost greater than 100 nm of the PEPI flakes is shown in Fig. 9b. Fig. 9c depicts the steady-state PL spectra of WS2, PEPI, and the thick PEPI/WS2 heterostructure at 110 K. WS2's excitonic emission is increased in the heterostructure. The heterostructure exhibits a broadband emission with a 1.77 eV center energy and a 180 meV full width at half-maximum. It was previously reported that a comparable broadband emission in the quasi-2D perovskite/2L-WS2 heterostructure was caused by the emission from interface defects.93
 Fig. 9  (a) The schematic depicts various energy transfer paths for the excitons that are produced away from the WS2/PEPI interface. (b) An optical representation of a thick PEPI/WS2 heterostructure. (c) The PL spectra measured at 110 K for WS2, PEPI, and their heterostructure. The long-pass filter with a wavelength of 600 nm is responsible for the cutoff at 2.07 eV. Panel (a) to panel (c) were adapted with permission from the publisher.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Increasing the excitons emission in 2D/quantum dot Perovskite heterostructures
Self-trapped excitons have attracted a lot of interest, which is due to their distinctive broadband emission and the possibility of using them as sources of continuous white light. These excitons frequently appear in materials with strong electron–phonon coupling and soft lattices. However, some 2D and 3D perovskites typically emit weak self-trapped excitons, which is due to their low radiative recombination rate. The current approaches, such as organic ligand modification and metal cation doping that are used for improving the efficiency of self-trapped excitons’ emission frequently entail challenging situations, which are due to chemical synthesis processes. A novel method for significantly increasing exciton emission is presented in this paper, which is the interfacial excitonic energy transfer in integrated heterostructures of 2D and perovskite quantum dots. The self-trapped exciton emission in the heterostructures may grow by more than two orders of magnitude compared to the individual 2D perovskite crystals. The improved self-trapped exciton emission in the heterostructure can be ascribed to the Dexter energy transfer that occurs at the heterostructure's interface, which is according to excitation power-dependent, the temperature-dependent, and the thickness-dependent PL studies. This study offers a straightforward and useful interface-based approach in order to increase the efficiency of the exciton emission for photoelectric devices that are produced by self-trapped excitons.

Fig. 10a exhibits the representation design of a heterostructure that is composed of a (iso-BA)2PbI4 (Iso) microplate and a CsPbBrxI3−x on a SiO2/Si substrate, which the (iso-BA)2PbI4 microplate was placed on top of a CsPbBrxI3−x quantum dots film. The (iso-BA)2PbI4 is made up of octahedra that share their corners with the PbX6 crystals and iso-BA+ ions, which fill in the spaces in between.94 It was concluded that the increased self-trapped exciton emission in the 2D heterostructures and the quantum dot perovskite, which is shown in Fig. 10b, is a result of the resonant energy transfer that occurs between the quantum dots and the self-trapped excitons of the 2D perovskites, which is based on the experimental findings. The Dexter Energy Transfer (DET) and Förster Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET) are two common types of energy transfers.95–98 A time-resolved PL (TRPL) was previously performed, which is illustrated in Fig. 10c, in order to demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that the energy transfer that occurs in the heterostructures is not FRET. The estimated average lifetimes of FX and ST1 in 2D/quantum dots perovskite heterostructure and excitons in quantum dots are 0.57, 1.31, and 0.62 ns, respectively. These lifetimes in contrast are 0.87 and 3.26 ns in 2D perovskite crystals. The PL lifetime of ST1 in 2D (iso-BA)2PbI4 perovskite is less than the normal lifetime of the self-trapped exciton emission, which may be due to the differing emission processes in different materials. Self-trapped excitons show a longer lifetime than quantum dots for both heterostructures, and 2D perovskite crystals. This further rules out FRET in their case, which is depicted in Fig. 10c, and demands that the donors’ lifetime be longer than that the lifetime of the acceptors.99 The fact that both FX and ST1 have shorter lifetimes in the heterostructures than in the 2D perovskite crystals shows that the energy transfer in this system is an efficient rapid fading mechanism.28,100,101 DET should be the reason for the higher self-trapped exciton emission in the heterostructures, which is shown in Fig. 10a. Fig. 10a illustrates that the STE state is easily formed upon the photo exciton with a brief timeframe, because they used a laser with a wavelength of 473 nanometers in order to excite the heterostructure, and an energy that was greater than the band gap of 2D perovskites was used. The energy is transferred afterwards, which causes the STE emissions to increase. A 10 nm-thick layer of BN was placed between the quantum dot film and the 2D perovskite microplates in order to further confirm this, which is shown in Fig. 10d. The increase in the self-trapped exciton emission was eliminated after introducing the BN layer, because this would impede the charge transfer and DET. The FRET would theoretically still be able to occur even after the 10 nm BN layer was added.102 The emission intensity of the self-trapped excitons can surprisingly be increased by more than twice the magnitude after the heterostructure is formed with the quantum dot film compared to the bare 2D perovskite microplates.
 Fig. 10  (a) A (iso-BA)2PbI4 (Iso) microplate/CsPbBrxI3−x quantum dot heterostructure is shown schematically on an SiO2/Si substrate. (b) A schematic representation of how energy is transferred within the heterostructure of 2D and quantum dot perovskite. (c) The excitons in quantum dots, the self-trapped excitons in heterostructures, and the free excitons were studied using the time-resolved PL spectra. (d) The perovskite heterostructure PL spectra with and without BN inserted between the quantum dot film and the 2D perovskite microplate, which the insets are structural diagrams of the device. Panel (a) to panel (d) were adapted with permission from the publisher.103 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Long-range charge transport in CsPbBr3/MoS2
Atomically thin 2D TMDs, such as photodetectors, phototransistors, and spintronic devices have demonstrated great possibilities for optoelectronic applications. TMD-based optoelectronic devices’ applications are strictly limited by their short exciton lifetime and low light absorption, which is due to their strong excitonic effect and atomically thin nature. Type-II heterostructures, which are based on 3D perovskite/2D-TMD, that are created by a coupling solution processed ligand free and highly smooth CsPbBr3 film with WS2 and MoS2 monolayers in order to increase the photocarrier lifetime and the light absorption in monolayer semiconductors. Time-resolved spectroscopy is used in order to demonstrate that the interfacial hole transfer from WS2 (MoS2) to the perovskite layer occurs between 100 and 350 fs, and the interfacial electron transfer from the ultrathin CsPbBr3 to WS2 (MoS2) occurs between 3 and 9 ps, which results in a long-lasting charge separation with a lifetime of more than 20 ns. The efficiency remains close to unity despite the slower electron transfer rate from CsPbBr3 to TMD with an increasing CsPbBr3 thickness, since the ultrafast interfacial electron transfer and the coupled long-range diffusion are responsible. This study demonstrates that the coupling solution processed lead halide perovskites long carrier diffusion length and with strong light absorption to monolayer semiconductors in order to form a type-II heterostructure is a promising strategy for simultaneously improving the photocarrier lifetime and light harvesting ability of monolayer semiconductors.

Fig. 11a shows an optical image of a heterostructure sample with exposed CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/MoS2 heterostructure regions. Both constituents’ PLs exhibit significant quenching in HS, which points to a type-II band alignment that involves a charge transfer. Fig. 11b shows the energy level diagrams for the monolayers of CsPbBr3 and MoS2. The CBM/VBM of 1L-MoS2 and CsPbBr3 are roughly at −4.1/−6.0 eV104 and −3.3/−5.7 eV,105 respectively, which creates a type-II band alignment. The photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the MoS2 and CsPbBr3 layers are driven apart by the large band offset. The photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the CsPbBr3 and MoS2 layers are driven apart by the large band offset. Fig. 11c illustrates that the TA kinetics of the 1L-MoS2 and CsPbBr3/MoS2 heterostructure are contrasted. A biexponential fitting on the transient absorption kinetics of the monolayer MoS2 yields a half-life period of about 5 ps. However, the transient absorption signals of CsPbBr3 and MoS2 in the heterostructure form right away and exhibit the same kinetics with only a slight decay of 1.3 ns, which is 10%. The transient absorption kinetics of CsPbBr3 in the heterostructure directly depicts the procedure for the hole transfer and the subsequent charge recombination because of the GSB of CsPbBr3 and the results of an injected hole produced by the photoexcited MoS2, which is depicted in Fig. 11d. The rising and decaying process of the CsPbBr3 kinetics can be fitted with a single exponential function, which results in hole transfer lifetimes of 90 femtoseconds and charges separation lifetimes of >20 nanoseconds being obtained.
 Fig. 11  (a) An optical image of a heterostructure constructed from CsPbBr3 and MoS2 with 10 μm scale. (b) Monolayer CsPbBr3 and MoS2 energy level diagram, which is relative to a vacuum. (c) Incident photon energy of 1.97 eV excitation, transient absorption kinetics of WS2 monolayer, MoS2, and CsPbBr3 in heterostructure. (d) Interfacial charge transfer process band diagram and the scheme in a CsPbBr3/WS2 heterostructure. The interfacial electron lifetime is 9 ps, and the hole transfer lifetime is 0.35 ps. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.106 Copyright 2022, American Institute of Physics. 
3.6 Excitons from WS2 and PbI2 nanostructures in the visible region
A lot of research has been conducted on the heterointerlayer excitons in the heterostructures of different 2D nanosystems with a staggered band alignment, which are type II. The PL properties of the exciton species, which include the heterointerlayer excitons in the 1L-WS2 and ML-PbI2 heterostructures, were examined in this study from 3 to 293 K. The PL intensity of 1L-WS2 dramatically decreased after hybridization with ML-PbI2, which indicates the presence of a charge transfer. The neutral excitons (X0), biexcitons (XX) and trion-exciton (X−), and 1L-WS2, which are the intralayer excitons, were detected at 594, 601, and 606 nm, respectively, in the deconvoluted PL spectra of the heterostructure at 3 K. A broad and intense PL emission was detected in the heterointerlayer excitons was primarily caused in the heterostructure in the visible wavelengths between 675 and 700 nm (>200 K). All the PL peaks correspond to the distinctive excitons being redshifted as the temperature increases, which is due to an increase in the electron–phonon interactions. The PL peaks of the heterostructure's HIXs were visibly blue-shifted with the increased excitation power, whereas the PL peaks that corresponded to the X0, X−, and XX of WS2 were redshifted. These alterations resulted from the repelling interactions between the dipole-aligned heterointerlayer excitons and the screening effect of the Coulomb. The 4.22 ns lifetime of the heterointerlayer excitons in the heterostructure obtained from the time-resolved PL decay curves at 3 K for significantly long intralayer excitons, which were around 8.6 times longer. This study explains the heterointerlayer excitons in the 2D heterostructures. The platforms provided by these excitons are potential for use in nanoscale photovoltaics, sensors, and LEDs.

Fig. 12a shows a schematic representation of the heterointerlayer excitons in the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure. Fig. 12b shows the Conduction Band (CB) and the Valance Band (VB) energy levels66,107–110 and the type II staggered band alignment of the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure. The results of the UV photoelectron and the optical absorption spectra were used in order to estimate the multilayer PbI2's maximum VB (6.47 eV) and the minimum CB (4.09 eV). The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure's type II band alignment was experimentally verified. Fig. 12b illustrates that the electrons from WS2 and the holes from PbI2 can be transferred to neighboring heterolayers under photoexcitation. The transferred electrons and the holes are spatially confined by Coulomb interactions at these heterolayers, which form heterointerlayer excitons. The Bright-field, which are shown on the left, and epifluorescence, which are shown on the right, images of the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure stimulated by the 365 nm line of a Hg lamp are shown in Fig. 12c. Fig. 12c also illustrates how the entire transferred WS2 was placed onto the PbI2 TS, which is illustrated by the yellow dotted line. The overlapping area of the WS2 and PbI2 layers in the heterostructure shows a darker contrast in the epifluorescence image, which is illustrated in Fig. 12c. This shows that PL quenching in 1 L of WS2 was initiated by the charge-transfer interaction between the WS2 and PbI2 layers. Fig. 12d displays the pristine WS2, which is illustrated by the blue curve, and the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure, which is illustrated by the red curve, LCM PL spectra at 293 K. The primary PL peak of pure WS2 was discovered at 608 nm. There is no indirect-gap emission, so only one layer makes up WS2.111 WS2's PL intensity dramatically reduced when compared to the LCM PL spectra of pristine WS2 after the development of the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure, and its peak was redshifted by around 10 nm. These adjustments were initiated by the charge-transfer effect, which led to a reduction in the neutral excitons and an increase in the trions and biexcitons in WS2. The dark epifluorescence image of the heterojunction region, which is shown in Fig. 12d, further supported this conclusion.
 Fig. 12  (a) The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure with heterointerlayer excitons is schematically depicted. (b) WS2/PbI2 heterostructure energy band alignment with the heterointerlayer excitons formation. (c) Epifluorescence and optical bright-field images of the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure. The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure can be observed inside the yellow dotted region. (d) The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure's, which is illustrated by the red curve, and the pure WS2′s, which is illustrated by the blue curve, LCM PL spectra at 293 K with ex = 488 nm with a 30 μW of excitation power. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.69 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
4. Summary and prospects
In summary, TMDs and vdW heterostructured 2D materials have opened new optoelectronic doors. Interlayer couplings create fascinating physics concepts and multi functionalities in optoelectronics. In this review, we will primarily summarize the most recent and encouraging experimental findings of TMD heterostructures with h-BN, graphene, 2D perovskites. Each potential interlayer coupling mechanism was covered by using a specific example, and then the we presented the state of the field and its future directions. Such a review offers the chance to develop a thorough understanding of interlayer coupling in vdW heterostructures. Table 1 displays the performance of various 2D TMDs and integrated perovskites heterostructures.
Table 1 Performance of different 2D TMDs and integrated perovskites heterostructures




Device structure
Thickness (nm)
Lifetime
Approach
Ref.




WS2/h-BN/MoSe2
—
38 ps
Experimental

4



MoS2/h-BN/WS2
1.10/4.20/1.01
0.80 to 0.15 ns
Experimental

64



WSe2/PbI4
1L
∼9 to ∼3 ns
Experimental

112



WSe2/PbI4
2L
∼1.6 to ∼0.4 ns
Experimental

112



WS2/(PEA)2PbI4
—
—
Theoretical

113



PEPI/WS2
∼100/1L
∼3 ns−1
Experimental

60



Gr/h-BN/WS2
—
56.3 ± 0.9 ps
Experimental

41



WS2/HfS2
3L
∼1 ps
Experimental

83



CsPbBr3/MoS2
8/1L
∼3 ps
Experimental

106



CsPbBr3/WS2
8/1L
∼9 ps
Experimental

106



WS2/PbI2
1 L/6.4
4.22 ns
Experimental

114





The formation of a type-II band alignment in a 2D vdW heterostructure that is constructed from two monolayer TMDs can drive an ultrafast charge transfer in femtoseconds and produce spatially separated interlayer excitons. However, the lifetime of the interlayer exciton is only hundreds of picoseconds to a few nanoseconds at ambient temperature, which is due to how close the layers are to one another, and the TMD bilayer heterostructures still have a relatively low light absorption. The quantum dots/2D hybrid heterostructures that combine the TMD monolayers with quantum dots with size-tunable properties have in contrast also received a lot of attention. However, the carrier diffusion length of quantum dots is limited, which limits the quantum dot layer thickness and affects the light absorption capacity, so designing type-II heterostructures that can simultaneously overcome the short exciton lifetime and weak light absorption of monolayer semiconductors is crucial for highly efficient TMD monolayer semiconductor-based optoelectronic devices. On the contrary, quickly developing a 2D material library that combines a wide range of properties with meticulous planning and material selection offers an exceptional framework in regards to investigating novel ideas in charge and energy transfers at 2D limits. Therefore, promoting the practical applications of charge and energy transfer detection and modulation in next-generation low-dimensional optoelectronic devices is advantageous in this type of novel system.
Interlayer coupling involved in efficient energy or charge transfer is extensively studied but remains very difficult to manipulate, thanks to the recent popularity of research on 2D material heterostructures, especially the fabrication of vertical junctions. Energy or charges should be relatively simple in order to be realized in perovskite oxides, which is due to their tunable compositions and structures. The performance and durability in various applications are still limited by the chemical instability of perovskite oxide surfaces that are caused by cation segregation and phase precipitation. The performance of a device might be more stable if 2D materials and perovskites are combined. TMDs layer stacking can result in vdW interfaces regardless of the lattice constants or the specific building block symmetries. It might be possible to create optoelectronic devices that are more efficient by managing the symmetry of a vdW interface. The bulk photovoltaic effect for solar-power harvesting115 should be fairly simple to realize in perovskite oxides. The performance and durability in a variety of applications are limited by the chemical instability of perovskite oxide surfaces that are caused by cation segregation and phase precipitation.116 The performance of a device may be more stable where more theoretical and experimental demonstration is required when 2D materials and perovskites are combined.117,118 The layer stacking of TMDs has the potential to produce vdW interfaces, which is regardless of the constants of the lattice or the symmetries of the individual building blocks. In-plane electronic polarization can potentially be obtained by carefully manipulating the symmetry of a vdW interface. As a result, a spontaneous PV effect was produced119 as well as a vdW interface that lacked inversion symmetry that was composed of individual layers, which requires further investigation.120 In order to create more energy-efficient computing systems, the study of spin-polarized optoelectronic in 2D materials could advance that research. The current research summary on nanomaterial-based materials can be used in a number of ways to create materials that will perform better when storing, manipulating, and transmitting information.
The majority of the papers about 2D TMDs concentrate on fundamental research in order to examine the mechanism of energy or the charge transfer. However, efforts are now being made in order to produce large-area 2D materials. Optoelectronic photoactive absorbing layers enjoy the benefits of high charge mobilities, the ability to adjust bandgaps, and high absorption coefficients. 2D TMDs have demonstrated a significant amount of promise in optoelectronics over the past decade, but they continue to struggle with several obstacles. The optoelectronic properties of TMDs vary depending on their layer, so it is challenging to control their shape when it comes to optoelectronics. The high cost of 2D materials is another significant barrier that stands in the way of their commercialization in the long term. However, this fabrication process must be streamlined in order to fabricate complex structure shapes. A claim was made that a simultaneous conversion of the (NH4)2 MoS4 films via a two-step thermal decomposition process is more efficient in order to obtain homogeneous TMDs layers without evaporating the sources.121 TMDs high-quality large-area sheets of various thicknesses have been created using liquid exfoliation.122 The thermolysis of the spin-coated thin films provides a method in order to synthesize 2D TMDs sheets without the use of sulfur or high temperatures, and the liquid exfoliation of 2D materials offers excellent control of the film thickness by varying the solution concentration with the spin coating speed. It is anticipated that developing novel and efficient design techniques for 2D materials would open the door to the commercialization of high-performance optoelectronic technologies.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-00165798). The authors gratefully thank the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Khalid University for funding this work through the Small Groups Project under grant number (R.G.P.1/67/43).
References
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, P. L. Hernández-Martínez, X. Liu, M.-R. Amara, W. Zhao, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. V. Demir and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13470–13477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cerdán, E. Enciso, V. Martín, J. Bañuelos, I. López-Arbeloa, A. Costela and I. García-Moreno, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 621–626 CrossRef .
S. Lu, Z. Lingley, T. Asano, D. Harris, T. Barwicz, S. Guha and A. Madhukar, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4548–4552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gong, P. Wang, D. Dai, Z. Liu, L. Zheng and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 2994–3025 RSC .
S. J. Kim, M.-A. Kang, I.-S. Jeon, S. Ji, W. Song, S. Myung, S. S. Lee, J. Lim and K.-S. An, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12354–12359 RSC .
B. Adilbekova, Y. Lin, E. Yengel, H. Faber, G. Harrison, Y. Firdaus, A. El-Labban, D. H. Anjum, V. Tung and T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5259–5264 RSC .
J. E. Kim, W. T. Kang, Y. R. Kim, Y. S. Shin, I. Lee, U. Y. Won, B. H. Lee, K. Kim, T. L. Phan and Y. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3504–3512 RSC .
M. Achermann, M. A. Petruska, S. Kos, D. L. Smith, D. D. Koleske and V. I. Klimov, Nature, 2004, 429, 642–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hashtroudi, I. D. Mackinnon and M. Shafiei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13108–13126 RSC .
Y.-Q. Li, X.-Y. Wang, S.-Y. Zhu, D.-S. Tang, Q.-W. He and X.-C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12132–12140 RSC .
H. Jin, J. Li, B. Wang, Y. Yu, L. Wan, F. Xu, Y. Dai, Y. Wei and H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11253–11260 RSC .
S. K. Lyo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 115303 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, P. L. Hernández-Martínez, X. Liu, M.-R. Amara, W. Zhao, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. V. Demir and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13470–13477 CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
S. Aftab and M. Z. Iqbal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 17414–17430 RSC .
S. Aftab, M. Z. Iqbal, M. W. Iqbal, M. Asghar and H. Ullah, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14795–14811 RSC .
S. Aftab, M. Samiya, W. Liao, M. W. Iqbal, M. Ishfaq, K. Ramachandraiah, H. M. S. Ajmal, H. M. U. Haque, S. Yousuf and Z. Ahmed, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3998–4007 RSC .
S. Aftab, M. Samiya, H. M. U. Haq, M. W. Iqbal, M. Hussain, S. Yousuf, A. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, Z. Ahmed and M. Z. Iqbal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 199–207 RSC .
A. Chernikov, T. C. Berkelbach, H. M. Hill, A. Rigosi, Y. Li, B. Aslan, D. R. Reichman, M. S. Hybertsen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 076802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. You, X.-X. Zhang, T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 477–481 Search PubMed .
D. Xiao, G.-B. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16055 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, W. Liu, J. F. Schmidt, W. Zhao, X. Lu, T. Raab, C. Diederichs, W. Gao, D. V. Seletskiy and Q. Xiong, Nature, 2017, 541, 62–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, C. Jin, B. Chen, H. Cai, T. Zhao, P. Lee, S. Kahn, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, M. F. Crommie and F. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700518 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Du, J. Zhao, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, H. Xu and Q. Xiong, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 2832–2840 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, W. Xu, W. Zhao, J. B. Khurgin and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1686–1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1996–2003 CAS .
P. Rivera, J. R. Schaibley, A. M. Jones, J. S. Ross, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, P. Klement, K. Seyler, G. Clark, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rivera, K. L. Seyler, H. Yu, J. R. Schaibley, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, W. Yao and X. Xu, Science, 2016, 351, 688–691 CAS .
H. Zang, P. K. Routh, Y. Huang, J.-S. Chen, E. Sutter, P. Sutter and M. Cotlet, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4790–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Raja, A. Montoya-Castillo, J. Zultak, X.-X. Zhang, Z. Ye, C. Roquelet, D. A. Chenet, A. M. van der Zande, P. Huang, S. Jockusch, J. Hone, D. R. Reichman, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2328–2333 CAS .
F. Prins, A. J. Goodman and W. A. Tisdale, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6087–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Li, X. Zheng, X. Cheng and T. Jiang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 1327–1334 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, A. Sharma, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, M. Dong, H. T. Nguyen, Z. Wang, B. Wen, Y. Cao, B. Liu, X. Sun, J. Yang, Z. Li, A. Kar, Y. Shi, D. Macdonald, Z. Yu, X. Wang and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803986 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Pei, Z. Hu, W. Zhao, S. Liu, M.-R. Amara, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5359–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Shi, Y. Mi, X. Sui, H. Xu and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4304–4319 RSC .
W.-X. Yang, H. Zhou, D. Su, Z.-R. Yang, Y. Song, X.-Y. Zhang and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7352–7367 RSC .
Y. Huang, W. Jiao, Z. Chu, G. Ding, M. Yan, X. Zhong and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8616–8625 CAS .
D. Kozawa, A. Carvalho, I. Verzhbitskiy, F. Giustiniano, Y. Miyauchi, S. Mouri, A. H. Castro Neto, K. Matsuda and G. Eda, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4087–4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Zhou and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2341–2348 CAS .
W. Xu, D. Kozawa, Y. Liu, Y. Sheng, K. Wei, V. B. Koman, S. Wang, X. Wang, T. Jiang, M. S. Strano and J. H. Warner, Small, 2018, 14, 1703727 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Zhao, W. Du, R. Su and Q. Xiong, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1399–1405 CrossRef CAS .
C. Robert, D. Lagarde, F. Cadiz, G. Wang, B. Lassagne, T. Amand, A. Balocchi, P. Renucci, S. Tongay, B. Urbaszek and X. Marie, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 205423 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Long, M. Qin, X. Lu, S. Chen, F. Xie, L. Gong, J. Chen, M. Chu and Q. Miao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2706–2721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leng, W. Fu, Y. Liu, M. Chhowalla and K. P. Loh, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 482–500 CrossRef CAS .
O. F. Williams, Z. Guo, J. Hu, L. Yan, W. You and A. M. Moran, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 134706 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, C. Zhang, W. Liu, X. Li, H. Long, K. Wang, B. Wang and P. Lu, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 18448–18456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao, Q. Dong, C. Zhao, M. Leng, F. Ma, W. Liang, L. Wang, S. Jin, J. Han, L. Zhang, J. Etheridge, J. Wang, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nature, 2018, 563, 541–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. Cai, T. Xu, X. Pu, P. Du, X. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Yuan, H. Chen, Q. Ai, J. Si, X. Yao, M. K. Rabchinskii, P. N. Brunkov and Z. Liu, J. Lumin., 2020, 226, 117457 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Q. Hu, J. Luo, T. Jin, J. Liu, J. Li, Z. Tan, Y. Han, Z. Zheng and T. Zhai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901098 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Smith and H. I. Karunadasa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 619–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bradac, Z.-Q. Xu and I. Aharonovich, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1193–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, E. Linardy, X. Wang and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11482–11489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bao, K.-L. Wong, D. Jin and P. A. Tanner, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 96 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
E. Shi, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, A. H. Coffey and L. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6046–6072 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Liu, X. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 8521–8526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aftab, I. Akhtar, Y. Seo and J. Eom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42007–42015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Liu, J. Li, X. Cheng, J. Ma, H. Wang and D. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10258–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karpinska, M. Liang, R. Kempt, K. Finzel, M. Kamminga, M. Dyksik, N. Zhang, C. Knodlseder, D. K. Maude and M. Baranowski, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 33677–33684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, D. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Hu, J. Li and D. Li, Nano Lett., 2022, 22(17), 7230–7237 CAS .
J. Y. Kim, T. J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, E. Lee, J. Kim and J. Joo, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5(8), 11167–11175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, J. Wu, B. T. Zhou, J. Liang, T. Ideue, T. Siu, K. M. Awan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pak, J. Lee, Y.-W. Lee, A. R. Jang, S. Ahn, K. Y. Ma, Y. Cho, J. Hong, S. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, H. Im, H. S. Shin, S. M. Morris, S. Cha, J. I. Sohn and J. M. Kim, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5634–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Y. Bao, Z. Li, Y. Gong, R. Feng, Y. Xiao, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhu, P. M. Ajayan and Z. Fang, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 16–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Hong, C. Lian, W. Ma, X. Xu, X. Zhou, H. Fu, K. Liu and S. Meng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700086 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Froehlicher, E. Lorchat and S. Berciaud, Phys. Rev. X, 2018, 8, 011007 CAS .
L. Ju, J. Velasco, E. Huang, S. Kahn, C. Nosiglia, H.-Z. Tsai, W. Yang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Crommie, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aftab, M. Z. Iqbal and M. W. Iqbal, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 2201219 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth and I. Aharonovich, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 37–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Hu, X. Niu, J. Xie, S. Chu and Q. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 924–941 RSC .
S. Aftab, M. Z. Iqbal and M. W. Iqbal, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2201219 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, A. Johnson, C.-L. Hsu, L.-J. Li and C.-K. Shih, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2443–2447 CAS .
X. Liu, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, G. P. Campbell, M. J. Bedzyk and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, L. Jiao, L. Xie, F. Yang, J. Chen, W. Ho, C. Gao, J. Jia, X. Cui and M. Xie, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 034004 CrossRef .
S. Lukman, L. Ding, L. Xu, Y. Tao, A. C. Riis-Jensen, G. Zhang, Q. Y. S. Wu, M. Yang, S. Luo and C. Hsu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 675–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Silver, J. Yin, H. Li, J.-L. Brédas and A. Kahn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703468 CrossRef .
J. Jadczak, J. Kutrowska-Girzycka, P. Kapuściński, Y. S. Huang, A. Wójs and L. Bryja, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 395702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, C. Cong, S. Konabe, J. Zhang, J. Shang, Y. Chen, C. Zou, B. Cao, L. Wu, N. Peimyoo, B. Zhang and T. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, 1805503 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9218 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Straus, N. Iotov, M. R. Gau, Q. Zhao, P. J. Carroll and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1198–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, E. Shi, S. Deng, S. B. Shiring, J. M. Snaider, C. Liang, B. Yuan, R. Song, S. M. Janke, A. Liebman-Peláez, P. Yoo, M. Zeller, B. W. Boudouris, P. Liao, C. Zhu, V. Blum, Y. Yu, B. M. Savoie, L. Huang and L. Dou, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 1151–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. J. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 011002 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
A. Yang, J.-C. Blancon, W. Jiang, H. Zhang, J. Wong, E. Yan, Y.-R. Lin, J. Crochet, M. G. Kanatzidis, D. Jariwala, T. Low, A. D. Mohite and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4852–4860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
K. V. Reich and B. I. Shklovskii, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10267–10274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hoffman, H. Choi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18453–18461 CrossRef CAS .
D. Giovanni, M. Righetto, Q. Zhang, J. W. M. Lim, S. Ramesh and T. C. Sum, Light:
Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, W. Zheng, X. Wang, M. P. Hautzinger, D. Pan, L. Dang, J. C. Wright, A. Pan and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15675–15683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cardoso Dos Santos, W. R. Algar, I. L. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2020, 125, 115819 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. A. Tanoh, N. Gauriot, G. Delport, J. Xiao, R. Pandya, J. Sung, J. Allardice, Z. Li, C. A. Williams, A. Baldwin, S. D. Stranks and A. Rao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15374–15384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wei, T. Jiang, Z. Xu, J. Zhou, J. You, Y. Tang, H. Li, R. Chen, X. Zheng, S. Wang, K. Yin, Z. Wang, J. Wang and X. Cheng, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800128 CrossRef .
P. Moroz, L. Royo Romero and M. Zamkov, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3033–3048 RSC .
W. Li, L. Hu, J. Ma, C. Jiang, S. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Hu, X. Liu, T. Wu and D. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2022, 102(1), 012111 Search PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Fang, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, H. He and H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 41895–41903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, G. Lu, Y. Zhang, Z. Fang, H. He and H. Zhu, J. Chem. Phys., 2022, 156, 244701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, J. Li and D. Li, Small, 2019, 15, 1902424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ubrig, E. Ponomarev, J. Zultak, D. Domaretskiy, V. Zólyomi, D. Terry, J. Howarth, I. Gutiérrez-Lezama, A. Zhukov, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, Z. D. Kovalyuk, A. Patané, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, R. V. Gorbachev, V. I. Fal'ko and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 299–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nguyen, N. C. Teutsch, N. P. Wilson, J. Kahn, X. Xia, A. J. Graham, V. Kandyba, A. Giampietri, A. Barinov, G. C. Constantinescu, N. Yeung, N. D. M. Hine, X. Xu, D. H. Cobden and N. R. Wilson, Nature, 2019, 572, 220–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Butov, A. A. Shashkin, V. T. Dolgopolov, K. L. Campman and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 8753–8758 CrossRef CAS .
B. Laikhtman and R. Rapaport, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 195313 CrossRef .
W. Yao, D. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Hu, J. Li and D. Li, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 7230–7237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karpińska, M. Liang, R. Kempt, K. Finzel, M. Kamminga, M. Dyksik, N. Zhang, C. Knodlseder, D. K. Maude, M. Baranowski, Ł. Kłopotowski, J. Ye, A. Kuc and P. Plochocka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 33677–33684 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, T. J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, E. Lee, J. Kim and J. Joo, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 11167–11175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aftab, M. Z. Iqbal, Z. Haider, M. W. Iqbal, G. Nazir and M. A. Shehzad, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 2201288 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu, L. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liang, A. Ali, A. Belaidi, M. I. Hossain, O. Ronan, C. Downing, N. Tabet, S. Sanvito, F. Ei-Mellouhi and V. Nicolosi, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2020, 4, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. Pescetelli, A. Agresti, G. Viskadouros, S. Razza, K. Rogdakis, I. Kalogerakis, E. Spiliarotis, E. Leonardi, P. Mariani and L. Sorbello, Nat. Energy, 2022, 1–11 Search PubMed .
T. Akamatsu, T. Ideue, L. Zhou, Y. Dong, S. Kitamura, M. Yoshii, D. Yang, M. Onga, Y. Nakagawa, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Laurienzo, J. Huang, Z. Ye, T. Morimoto, H. Yuan and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2021, 372, 68–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rasmita, C. Jiang, H. Ma, Z. Ji, R. Agarwal and W.-B. Gao, Optica, 2020, 7, 1204–1208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Lim, W. Song, J. K. Han, Y. B. Lee, S. J. Kim, S. Myung, S. S. Lee, K. S. An, C. J. Choi and J. Lim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5025–5030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, B. Adilbekova, Y. Firdaus, E. Yengel, H. Faber, M. Sajjad, X. Zheng, E. Yarali, A. Seitkhan and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Sikandar Aftab	Sikandar Aftab earned his Ph.D. in Physics from Department of Physics and Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University, South Korea. He also completed a two-year post-doctoral fellowship at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, Canada. Dr Aftab is currently employed as an Assistant Professor at Sejong University's Department of Intelligent Mechatronics Engineering in Seoul, South Korea. His research interests include nanodevices based on two-dimensional materials and heterostructures and solar cells.
Muhammad Zahir Iqbal	Muhammad Zahir Iqbal received his Ph.D. from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain in 2014 and second PhD from Sejong University, Seoul, South Korea in 2014. Furthermore, he has done his post doctorate from Georgia State University, Atlanta, USA in 2015. Currently, Dr Iqbal is working as an Associate Professor at GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology. His research focus is 2D materials and heterostructures, optoelectronics and renewable energy.
Hosameldin Helmy Hegazy	Dr. Hosameldin Helmy Hegazy is currently working as an associate professor in the Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia. He earned his Ph.D. in Semiconductor Physics from Saint Petersburg Electrotechnical University “LETI,” Russia. His main scientific interests are fabrication, characterization, and applications for thin film photovoltaics, energy storage-related materials, and low-dimensional heterostructures.
Sikander Azam	Sikander Azam received his Ph.D. from The University of West Bohemia, Czech Republic, in 2016. Furthermore, he has done his post doctorate from Ton Duc Thang University, Vietnam, in 2020. Currently, Dr Sikander is working as an Assistant Professor at Riphah International university, Pakistan. His research focus is 2D and 3D materials, optoelectronics, thermoelectric and renewable energy.
Fahmid Kabir	Fahmid Kabir is a third-year Ph.D. student in the School of Engineering Science at Simon Fraser University, Canada. He holds a B.Sc. degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology, Bangladesh and M.S. degree in Renewable Energy Technology from University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. His current research interests include 2D materials (TMD, MXene) based solar cells, and nanoelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The transferring of energy and photogating in WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction. Adapted with permission.4 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Defect-accelerated energy transfer imaging within MoS2/BN/WS2. Adapted with permission.64 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Heterostructure engineering to manipulate 2D charge and energy transfer. Adapted with permission.41 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Carrier excitation from mid-gap defect states in BN to WSe2. Adapted with permission.65 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Interlayer coupling in (iso-BA)2PbI4/WSe2 heterostructures. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Exciton transfer in Quasi-2D WS2/PEPI. Adapted with permission.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Energy and charge transfer in WS2/(PEA)2PbI4. Adapted with permission.67 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Interlayer excitons that carry momentum in WSe2/(iso-BA)2PbI4. Adapted with permission.68 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (h) In 2D/QD Perovskite heterostructures, improving self-trapped exciton emission. Adapted with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (i) Excitons from WS2 and PbI2 nanostructures in the visible region. Adapted with permission.69 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A representation of FRET and photogating in a WS2/BN/MoSe2 heterojunction. The above WS2 bandgap excitation is used to illustrate various heterojunctions in schematic band diagrams in addition to the dynamic processes. (b) 1L-WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2, (c) BN/1L-MoSe2, and (d) ML-WS2/BN/1L-MoSe2. Panel (a) to panel (d) were adapted with permission from the publisher.4 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A schematic depicts the atomic structure of MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures. A few-layer insulating BN barrier is sandwiched between the top-layer MoS2 and bottom-layer WS2. (b) Raman mapping of MoS2/BN/WS2, MoS2/WS2 heterostructures and WS2. (c) PL spectra from the MoS2, WS2, MoS2/WS2, and MoS2/BN/WS2 regions at 532 nm excitation. (d) The defect-accelerated ET process's mechanism in MoS2/BN/WS2 heterostructures is depicted in a schematic diagram. All the above are adapted with permission from the publisher.64 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) An illustration of the Gr/h-BN/WS2 heterostructure. (b) An optical image of a representative sample was taken immediately after fabrication. The spectra of the steady-state PL Gr/BN/WS2 and BN/WS2 at temperatures of (c) 300 K and (d) 77 K. The trion and exciton peaks in WS2 are represented by the symbols X− and X. (e)The band alignment Gr/BN and (f) the charge transfer at the Gr/BN/WS2 interfaces. Panel (a) to panel (f) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.41 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) An optical representation of a BN/WSe2 FET device. (b) Transfer properties of doped and undoped BN/WSe2 FETs with a 5-min light pulse (incident photons energy = 5.6 eV). (c) Schematic diagram of photoinduced doping mechanism. It excites electrons in defect states when light strikes a BN material. The photoexcited electron enters the WSe2 flake when it is exposed to light via a photoinduced gate voltage. (d) Photoinduced doping creates a donor-like state in the middle of BN transform into positively charged defects. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.65 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of an exfoliated WS2 flake with a variable number of HfS2 layers on a doped silicon substrate, which Vg was used in order to regulate the interlayer bandgap and the band alignment and Vds was used for the charge extraction when the device was used as a photodetector. (b) WS2/bulk-HfS2 and WS2/3L-HfS2 heterostructure I–V curves at various excitation powers. The curves shift to the second quadrant with increased power, which indicates more charge carrier accumulation at the interface. (c) An illustration of band bending at the interface. It was assumed that as the number of layers increased, only the VBM of HfS2 shifted relative to the VBM of WS2, which is due to the relatively small shift in CBM indicated by the calculation. All the measurements were conducted at room temperature, and a 2.33 eV energy center laser was used to excite the photons. (d) The band profiles of the heterojunctions 1L-WS2/3L, 5L, and 7L-HfS2 at zero bias (Vg = 0). The vacuum level (Evac = 0 eV) was chosen as the energy reference. The grey areas indicate the spaces between WS2 and HfS2, and an EF line with a black dash is plotted. The black dots indicate the locations of the atoms in the out-of-plane direction. WS2 has a slight n doping with an EF of 0.15 eV above the intrinsic EF (Eg = 1.82 eV). Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.83 Copyright 2020, Nature Portfolio.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) An illustration of 1L and 2L heterostructures composed of WSe2/PbI4. (b) An image obtained from an optical microscope shows 1L and 2L heterostructures composed of WSe2/PbI4. The white scale bar is 20 μm. The band alignment of the (c) 1L and (d) 2L WSe2/PbI4 heterostructures. The black arrows depict the hole transfer from WSe2 to PbI4. (e) The PL spectra that have been normalized and taken from 1L and 2L heterostructures of WSe2/PbI4, which are abbreviated as HS. A laser with a wavelength of 405 nm was used to excite PbI4 (3.06 eV), whereas a laser with a wavelength of 633 nm was used to excite bare WSe2 and heterostructures (1.96 eV). The temperature that was used for the PL measurements was 78 K. Panel (a) to panel (e) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.68 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (f) DFT calculations for band alignment of a heterostructure constructed from WS2/PEPI. The pathways for the energy and charge transfer are displayed. (g) A WS2/PEPI heterostructure with BN capping layers is visible under an optical microscope. The color spectra shown in the panels below correspond to the color points on the image. (h) The PEPI absorption band is excited below (540 nm) in the PL spectra of WS2. (i) The PL spectra of PEPI that were excited above the absorption band of PEPI (488 nm). All spectra were recorded at T = 5 K. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.67 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A representation of a monolayer TMD and 2D perovskite. (b) The band alignment of WSe2 and 2D perovskite (iso-BA)2PbI4 heterostructure forms a type-II heterostructure with an interlayer exciton emission when excited by a laser at 633 nm. (c) The PL spectra of the (iso-BA)2PbI4 microplate are displayed in the top section, the heterostructure is displayed in the middle section, and the monolayer WSe2 is displayed in the bottom section. All three panels were subjected to laser excitation at 633 nm with a power of 377 μW. Panel (a) to panel (c) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The schematic depicts various energy transfer paths for the excitons that are produced away from the WS2/PEPI interface. (b) An optical representation of a thick PEPI/WS2 heterostructure. (c) The PL spectra measured at 110 K for WS2, PEPI, and their heterostructure. The long-pass filter with a wavelength of 600 nm is responsible for the cutoff at 2.07 eV. Panel (a) to panel (c) were adapted with permission from the publisher.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A (iso-BA)2PbI4 (Iso) microplate/CsPbBrxI3−x quantum dot heterostructure is shown schematically on an SiO2/Si substrate. (b) A schematic representation of how energy is transferred within the heterostructure of 2D and quantum dot perovskite. (c) The excitons in quantum dots, the self-trapped excitons in heterostructures, and the free excitons were studied using the time-resolved PL spectra. (d) The perovskite heterostructure PL spectra with and without BN inserted between the quantum dot film and the 2D perovskite microplate, which the insets are structural diagrams of the device. Panel (a) to panel (d) were adapted with permission from the publisher.103 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) An optical image of a heterostructure constructed from CsPbBr3 and MoS2 with 10 μm scale. (b) Monolayer CsPbBr3 and MoS2 energy level diagram, which is relative to a vacuum. (c) Incident photon energy of 1.97 eV excitation, transient absorption kinetics of WS2 monolayer, MoS2, and CsPbBr3 in heterostructure. (d) Interfacial charge transfer process band diagram and the scheme in a CsPbBr3/WS2 heterostructure. The interfacial electron lifetime is 9 ps, and the hole transfer lifetime is 0.35 ps. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.106 Copyright 2022, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure with heterointerlayer excitons is schematically depicted. (b) WS2/PbI2 heterostructure energy band alignment with the heterointerlayer excitons formation. (c) Epifluorescence and optical bright-field images of the WS2/PbI2 heterostructure. The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure can be observed inside the yellow dotted region. (d) The WS2/PbI2 heterostructure's, which is illustrated by the red curve, and the pure WS2′s, which is illustrated by the blue curve, LCM PL spectra at 293 K with ex = 488 nm with a 30 μW of excitation power. Panel (a) to panel (d) were reproduced with permission from the publisher.69 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

WS2/h-BN/MoSe2	—	38 ps	Experimental	
4

MoS2/h-BN/WS2	1.10/4.20/1.01	0.80 to 0.15 ns	Experimental	
64

WSe2/PbI4	1L	∼9 to ∼3 ns	Experimental	
112

WSe2/PbI4	2L	∼1.6 to ∼0.4 ns	Experimental	
112

WS2/(PEA)2PbI4	—	—	Theoretical	
113

PEPI/WS2	∼100/1L	∼3 ns−1	Experimental	
60

Gr/h-BN/WS2	—	56.3 ± 0.9 ps	Experimental	
41

WS2/HfS2	3L	∼1 ps	Experimental	
83

CsPbBr3/MoS2	8/1L	∼3 ps	Experimental	
106

CsPbBr3/WS2	8/1L	∼9 ps	Experimental	
106

WS2/PbI2	1 L/6.4	4.22 ns	Experimental	
114


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
