Lignin to value-added chemicals and advanced materials: extraction, degradation, and functionalization  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC00092J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC00092J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 7705-7750Lignin to value-added chemicals and advanced materials: extraction, degradation, and functionalization

        
          
            Mei Jiao 
            Gan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu Qin 
            Niu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xue Jing 
            Qu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chun Hui 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a
aResearch Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Chemistry-Synthesis Technology, College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, 310032, China. E-mail: clay@zjut.edu.cn
bBamboo and Wood Testing Center, Zhejiang Academy of Forestry, Hangzhou, 310023, China
Received 
      9th January 2022
    , Accepted 10th August 2022First published on 1st September 2022AbstractLignin is a green and sustainable feedstock for the production of chemicals and materials; however, its utilization is still low. Over the past decade, remarkable progress has been achieved in the extraction, degradation, and functionalization of lignin and the fabrication of lignin-containing materials. In this review, we provide a critical examination of the in-depth insights into recently developed strategies for the green and efficient extraction, selective degradation and diverse functionalization of lignin. Its green extraction involves the judicious selection of solvent, and mild enzymatic conditions, leading to different technical lignin products. The degradation of lignin can be achieved via thermochemical, electrochemical, photocatalytic and biological processes. Lignin can be functionalized via the modification of its aromatic rings, modification of its hydroxyl groups, modification of its methoxy groups, and graft copolymerization. Based on the top-down degradation and bottom-up functionalization strategies, lignin can be converted into a variety of value-added chemicals and polymers and can be engineered into many types of lignin-based materials. These materials hold great promise in energy storage, targeted drug delivery, efficient adsorption and catalysis, functional packaging and slow-release fertilizers. The correlation among the sources, degradation, and functionalization of lignin and lignin-based materials is discussed. Also, we present a techno-economic analysis on the production of chemicals and materials from lignin. Finally, an outlook for lignin valorization is presented.Mei Jiao GanMei Jiao Gan is currently a researcher in the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She also works for Zhejiang Academy of Forestry, Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Applied Chemistry from Zhejiang International Studies University. Her research presently centers on lignin chemistry and advanced dolomite-based catalysts for the catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass. She has also been studying the quality and safety of bamboo and wood products.Yu Qin NiuYu Qin Niu is currently a postgraduate at the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Qingdao University of Science and Technology. Her research presently focuses on organic–inorganic-composite and biomaterials, interfacial chemistry of biochemicals and inorganic minerals under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. She has coauthored several scientific papers in international peer-reviewed international journals, including a recent one published in the journal Chemical Society Reviews (2022, 51, 7883–7943. Impact Factor: 60.615).Xue Jing QuXue Jing Qu is currently a researcher at the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Xinyang Normal University. Her research presently centers on the surface interactions between biochemicals and inorganic minerals, biomineralization, inorganic–organic-composites and biomaterials under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou.Chun Hui ZhouDr Chun Hui Zhou, was born and raised in Miaoqian, Qingyang, Anhui, and is a Professor of Chemical Engineering and Leader of the Research Group for Advanced Materials and Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), Zhejiang University of Technology. He is the Director of the Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals. He acts as AIPEA Vice President (2022–2025) & Chair ICC Advisory Committee, and AIPEA Councilor (2017–2022). He also serves as the Principal Editor of Clay Minerals, Associate Editor of Clays and Clay Minerals, and Editorial Member of Applied Clay Science (Elsevier), Journal of Porous Materials (Springer) and Materials Research Innovations (Taylor and Francis). He worked as a Visiting Academician at the University of Queensland (2006–2007) and as a Visiting Professor at the University of Western Australia (2010). His R&D centers on the catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass, applied clay mineralogy, limestone and dolomite, and functional biomass-/mineral-based materials. He teaches catalysis, materials science and engineering, and scientific literacy.
1. Introduction
Due to the rising concerns about dwindling fossil fuels, the production of fuels, chemicals, polymers, and materials starting from sustainable bioavailable feedstocks is desirable nowadays.1–3 In this context, lignocellulosic biomass, with large reserves, biological renewability, and good availability, is one of the most promising feedstocks.3,4 Lignin, which accounts for 15–30% of lignocellulosic biomass, is present in softwood, hardwood and grass.5–7 Lignin is naturally and biologically formed via the enzyme-mediated dehydrogenation polymerization of aromatic alcohol precursors derived from L-phenylalanine.4,8 In the cell wall of plants, lignin is responsible for transporting water and nutrients, providing strength and rigidity, and protecting the plant against environmental stresses and pathogens.4,5
Currently, in industry, a green and efficient way to generate lignin as a by-product in large quantities is from lignocellulosic biomass.9–11 Over 50 million tons of technical lignin is produced annually.9,10 However, most of it is used as a low-grade fuel.12,13 Only approximately 2% of technical lignin has been transformed into value-added products such as adhesives, dispersants and fillers.14,15 This is because the structural complexity and variability and chemical recalcitrance of lignin make it very challenging to convert it into fine chemicals, polymers and materials in a green and efficient way.6,16
As a source of aromatic structures, lignin has great potential for the preparation of aromatic chemicals via degradation.14,16 In recent years, thermochemical, electrochemical, photocatalytic, and biological processes have been used for the degradation of lignin, accompanied by the production of chemicals and fuels. The reactions involved mainly include pyrolysis, hydrogenolysis, oxidation, and gasification. At present, phenol and vanillin can be produced on a commercial scale via oxidation and pyrolysis, respectively.17
The aromatic rings, hydroxyl groups, carbonyl groups and methoxy groups of lignin can be further functionalized.4,18 With the help of the functionalization of its aromatic rings, hydroxyl groups, and methoxy groups, and graft copolymerization, many lignin-based materials such as energy storage materials,4 biomaterials,19 adsorbents,20 catalysts,21 films,22 and fertilizers23 have been developed recently. These materials show great potential in energy storage, drug delivery, wound healing, pollutant adsorption, catalysis, functional packaging and slow-release fertilizers.
The past few decades have witnessed fast-growing research on the valorization of lignin. Significant progress has been made in the in-depth understanding of the structure, extraction, degradation, functionalization and utilization of lignin. On the one hand, various new processes have been developed for the transformation of lignin into value-added chemicals and materials in a more effective and green way. On the other hand, strategies for its degradation and functionalization need to comply with the basic principles of green chemistry. In this review, we attempt to provide a comprehensive examination and discussion on the valorization of lignin, particularly on the studies reported in recent five years. We highlight the new scientific understanding of the structure of lignin, its physicochemical properties and newly developed methods for its extraction, degradation, and functionalization, and subsequently engineering lignin into value-added chemicals and advanced materials. Moreover, the relationship among the structure, degradation, and functionalization of lignin and lignin-based materials is explored. This will provide some guidance on the selection of lignin feedstock and processing methods based on the required materials and chemicals. Subsequently, a techno-economic analysis for the generation of chemicals and materials from lignin is conducted to reveal the gap between the reactions on a laboratory scale and the production and applications on a large scale in industry. The challenges identified and discussed in the final section of this review aim to inspire future research focusing on the problems associated with the valorization of lignin.
2. New sights into the structure and properties of lignin
2.1. The structure of lignin
The structure of native lignin is not yet fully understood.24 Currently, it is believed that lignin is mainly composed of C, O and H, where ratio of C/O is greater than 2:1 and the ratio of C/H is greater than 10:1.4,25–27 Some researchers use the so-called C9 formula to describe the composition of lignin. In the case of softwood lignin, the C9 formula is C9H7.92O2.40(OCH3)0.92, whereas C9H7.49O2.53(OCH3)1.39 fits for hardwood lignin.28
The variation in monolignol composition and the diversity of chemical linkages give rise to the heterogeneity of lignin.29 Lignin is typically derived from p-coumaryl alcohol, coniferyl alcohol and sinapyl alcohol. The biosynthetic pathways of the three types of monolignols are complex (Fig. 1a).8,30 Their corresponding building blocks in the structure of lignin are p-hydroxyphenyl (H unit), guaiacyl (G unit) and syringyl (S unit), respectively (Fig. 1a).8,31 Although the exact structure of native lignin is complex and varies, studies have shown that the lignin monolignols are predominantly linked via C–C and C–O bonds, and the types of major bonds are categorized as β-O-4, α-O-4, 4-O-5, 5-5′, β-5, β-1, and β-β (Fig. 1b).8,32 Hardwood lignin and softwood lignin show different amounts of these bonds (Fig. 1c). The β-O-4 ether bonds, accounting for about 50% (Fig. 1c), are a crucial target in the fractionation and degradation of lignin.12,16 Although other bonds are prevalent in the structure of lignin (Fig. 1b), they are difficult to degrade.33 A key and efficient strategy for the valorization of lignin is to cleave the ubiquitous C–O/C–C bonds, meanwhile leaving its aromatic rings intact.8,32
 Fig. 1  Structure and linkages of lignin. (a) Biosynthetic pathways for monolignol monomers. (b) Typical structure of lignin. Color: showing different types of chemical bonds. (c) Approximate amount of major chemical linkages in softwood lignin and hardwood lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
As early as in 1956, milled wood lignin (MWL) was extracted from spruce wood with dioxane–water as the solvent.34 Subsequently, it was found that the precursors of lignin are monolignols, including p-coumaryl, coniferyl and sinapyl alcohol.35 In 1977, Adler proposed that lignin is a highly branched biopolymer with various methoxy, carboxylic, phenolic hydroxyl, aliphatic hydroxyl, and carbonyl groups.36 However, with the advances in analytical techniques, insights into the structure of lignin have been updated. In 2011, Crestini et al.37 proposed that MWL is a linear oligomer. Based on the data from QQ-HSQC, 31P NMR, and derivatization followed by reductive cleavage coupled with 31P NMR analysis, there are no branching units in lignin. In 2020, Balakshin et al.38 suggested that the concept of linear lignin conflicts with the classical theory that lignin is a three-dimensional and cross-linked biopolymer. They noted that the structure of spruce MWL is significantly branched and cross-linked. Moreover, the results of CuO-permanganate oxidation, thioacidolysis-31P NMR, 13C NMR and short-range 1H–13C NMR characterizations indicated that about half of the branching and cross-linking linkages involve aromatic rings, predominantly 5-5′ units. The branches involved various aliphatic ether linkages at the α- and γ-positions of the side chain, with intact β-O-4 bonds.38 However, although more insights into the structure of extracted lignin or lignin models have been gained, the structure of native lignin remains unknown. Thus, innovative analytical strategies and instrumental techniques need to be developed to reveal it clearly because it is essential for the quality control of lignin products in the extraction and valorization of lignin.
2.2. Physical and chemical properties of lignin
Lignin can be classified into native lignin and technical lignin.39 It is worth noting that in many reports the two types of lignin are not well distinguished. Native lignin refers to the original lignin in lignocellulosic biomass,39 while technical lignin is the lignin product extracted on an industrial scale.4 The physical and chemical properties of technical lignin are usually related to the source and extraction method. For example, native lignin without any modification is almost colorless.40 However, due to the introduction of a variety of chromophores into the structure of lignin during the extraction process, the obtained technical lignin usually appears brown or dark brown.40,41 This coloring mechanism remains unclear thus far. Due to the structural changes caused by the extraction processes, the molecular mass of technical lignin typically varies in the range of 1000–20000 g mol−1.14,15 The glass transition temperature (Tg) of technical lignin is between 170 °C and 190 °C, depending on the degree of cross-linking and crystallinity.42
Lignin possesses antioxidant activity, antimicrobial activity, biodegradability and biocompatibility.43,44 Because lignin contains a large number of unsaturated double bonds such as carbonyl and vinyl, which can form conjugated systems with benzene rings, lignin has absorption in a broad range from the ultraviolet to visible light region.45 Consequently, it shows great potential in food packaging and sunscreen products.46 Owing to the presence of hydroxyl groups and carboxyl groups, lignin has the ability to adsorb or bind metal ions such as Fe3+ and Cu2+.45 Also, the phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin can be converted into quinone/hydroquinone moieties, which endow lignin with redox activity.4,42 In addition, due to the various reactive functional groups in lignin, its degradation and functionalization, such as hydrogenolysis, oxidation, amination, sulfonation, phenolation, esterification and graft copolymerization, can be achieved. Due to the sophisticated composition and structure of lignin, its physical and chemical properties are not fully disclosed. Thus the exploration of the physical and chemical behaviors of lignin will further help its valorization.
3. Improved extraction of lignin
Lignin extraction from lignocellulosic biomass is the first step toward its valorization. Native lignin is covalently linked with hemicellulose to form lignin–carbohydrate complexes.5,47 Breaking these linkages selectively and efficiently is a substantial challenge in the extraction of lignin from lignocellulosic biomass.48
Traditionally, in the cellulose-first processes, such as the pulping process and bioethanol production process, lignin is produced as a by-product.49 Harsh conditions are usually used to improve the productivity and quality of cellulose, which cause considerable cleavage of ether bonds and formation of more recalcitrant C–C bonds through subsequent repolymerization.49 Consequently, the resultant lignin appears less reactive and difficult to be further upgraded.50,51 Recently, a lignin-first concept was proposed, where the extraction of lignin, instead of cellulose and hemicellulose, is prioritized.2 To obtain high-quality lignin with little or even no structural damage, several attractive strategies for extracting lignin from lignocellulosic biomass have recently emerged.
3.1. Traditional extraction processes
In the pulping industry, the kraft process, sulfite process, soda process and organosolv process (Table 1) are primarily employed for the production of high-quality cellulose, and structurally modified lignin is usually produced due to the extensive use of inorganic salts, strong acid or base in these processes.16,52 For the extraction process, the sources of lignin, temperature, pH, pressure, and solvent should all be considered to promote the fragmentation of lignin and prevent its recondensation.14,33 Different technical lignins (i.e., kraft lignin, soda lignin, lignosulfonate, and organosolv lignin) possess very different structures, reactivity and market (Table 1). Clearly, lignin from different sources differs in molecular mass, polydispersity, Tg value, solubility, content of functional groups such as phenolic hydroxyl, carboxyl and methoxy groups, and the content of sulfur. The price of technical lignin depends on its purity, ranging from 180 to 520 US$ per ton. Given that the most important source of commercial lignin it lignosulfonate, its annual production reaches 1000 kt per year (Table 1).
Table 1 Physical and chemical properties, annual production, and price of technical lignin14,17,33,35




Lignin type
Sulfur content (wt%)
Ash content (wt%)
Molecular mass (g mol−1)
Polydispersity

T
g (°C)
Solubility
–COOH content (%)
Phenolic–OH content (%)
–OCH3 content (%)
Annual production (kt per year)
Price (US$ per ton)




Kraft lignin
1.0–3.0
0.5–3.0
<25000
2.5–4
108–165
Alkali; organic solvents
4.1
2.6
14
90
260–500


Lignosulfonate
3.5–8.0
4.5–8.0
<15000
4.2–9.0
127–154
Water
No data
No data
No data
1000
180–500


Soda lignin
0
0.7–2.3
<15000
2.5–3.5
150–155
Alkali
7.2–13.6
2.6–5.1
10–16
5–10
200–300


Organosolv lignin
0
∼1.7
<5000
1.5–2.4
89–97
Organic solvents
3.6–7.7
3.4–3.7
15.1–19
3
280–520




The kraft process, which was first invented and reported in 1879, is dominant in the pulping industry.17 In this process, lignocellulosic biomass is treated with NaOH and Na2S at 150–180 °C.29 Native lignin is split into small fragments primarily by the cleavage of α-aryl ether and β-aryl ether and is dissolved in the pulping liquor (e.g., black liquor).16,33 Currently, the black liquor containing lots of lignin is generally concentrated and burned to provide energy for pulping mills.17 To extract lignin from the black liquor, LignoBoost Technology® has been introduced. In this method, lignin is recovered through precipitation, separation, acidification and washing processes.33,53,54 In general, the obtained kraft lignin has a molecular weight of less than 25000 g mol−1, sulfur content of 1.0–3.0 wt%, and high content of methoxy groups (Table 1). Moreover, kraft lignin is hydrophobic; however, functionalization strategies can be used to introduce hydrophilic groups into its structure for the production of water-based products.17
The sulfite process is performed by using aqueous sulfur dioxide and sulfite (calcium, sodium, magnesium or ammonium salts).5,54 A major reaction in the sulfite process is the sulfonation of the aliphatic chain of lignin, which occurs at different positions depending on the pH value of the pulping solution.33 The introduction of sulfonate groups into the structure of lignin enables its hydrolysis and dissolution.14,54 Compared with kraft lignin, the resulting lignosulfonate contains a higher content of sulfur (3.5–8.0 wt%) and ash (4.5–8.0 wt%) (Table 1), which is not be beneficial for its use in some applications. In addition, lignosulfonate is water soluble. Lignosulfonate is generally used to produce surfactants, adsorbents, pesticides, additives for oil extraction, and stabilizers in colloidal suspensions.15,17
The soda process is typically used to treat non-wood materials such as straw, bagasse and flax.5 Typically, lignocellulosic biomass reacts with sodium hydroxide in the presence of anthraquinone, which decreases the degradation of carbohydrates and catalyzes delignification.14,35 In this process, the α and β ether bonds in native lignin are cleaved.33 Soda lignin has a high content of phenolic hydroxyl groups (2.6–5.1 wt%), carboxylic groups (7.2–13.6 wt%) and methoxy groups (10–16 wt%) (Table 1). Moreover, compared with kraft lignin and lignosulfonates, soda lignin has no sulfur and higher purity.
In the organosolv process, lignocellulosic biomass is treated with an organic solvent (e.g., ethanol, methanol and acetone) over acid catalysts (e.g., H2SO4, HCl and H3PO4) or organic acids (e.g., formic acid and formic acid). Organosolv treatment can cleave lignin–carbohydrate bonds, resulting in lignin with a structure close to native lignin.35 The resultant organosolv lignin is separated as a precipitate or by evaporation of the organic solvent,14 which has high purity and is sulfur free.4 In addition, organosolv lignin has a low molecular weight (<5000 g mol−1), low content of ash, and high content of methoxy groups (15.1–19%). However, the recovery of a large amount of solvent is costly.35
3.2. Emerging extraction processes
In the traditional extraction processes discussed above, toxic and uncontrollable by-products and a large amount of wastewater are produced.29,48 In addition, the purity and yield of technical lignin are low and its chemical structure varies significantly depending on the conditions.29 Accordingly, alternative extraction processes such as ionic liquid extraction, deep eutectic solvent extraction and enzymatic extraction have emerged. These methods are conducive to preventing the condensation of lignin by stabilizing ether bonds.55,56
Based on the principle of green chemistry, the design of new extraction processes should consider both technical factors and environmental impacts.40 Ionic liquids (ILs) are green and effective alternatives to volatile organic solvents for lignin extraction.40 It has been found that ILs can separate lignin mainly by selectively breaking lignin–carbohydrate complexes.57,58 Imidazolium-based ionic liquids such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride, and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium alkylbenzene sulfonate have been proven to be effective for the extraction of lignin from lignocellulosic biomass.57 Two types of processes for ionic liquid extraction have been invented. One is the dissolution of the entire lignocellulosic biomass including lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose, followed by lignin precipitation with an antisolvent such as organic or aqueous–organic solution. The other is to selectively extract lignin and hemicellulose with ILs, and then an antisolvent is used to precipitate lignin.40,57 At present, the IL-based processes for the extraction of lignin are conducted on a laboratory scale. Moreover, there are some problems such as high cost, toxicity concerns, large solvent consumption and solvent recovery.58,59 Thus, further research is required to make IL extraction commercially viable.
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) with possible advantages such as low cost, low toxicity, biodegradability and tunable physicochemical properties have been used for the extraction of lignin.47,60,61 DESs are typically eutectic mixtures of hydrogen bond donors (e.g., polyols and carboxylic acids) and hydrogen bond acceptors (e.g., choline chloride).62 For example, a DES system consisting of choline chloride and ethylene glycol (ChCl/EG) was used for the extraction of switchgrass.55 In this process, the highest delignification was nearly 90% within 30 min. The obtained lignin had high purity and well-preserved β-O-4 linkages. By adjusting the pretreatment conditions and DES compositions (e.g., acid concentration, temperature, water content, and molar ratio of ChCl and EG), the molecular weight, and the content of ether bonds, the extent of condensation of lignin can be tuned.69,74 However, further research is needed to develop effective DES recovery technology and design catalysts that are compatible with DESs.
The enzymatic extraction of lignin can be carried out under mild reaction conditions without toxic chemicals and is environmentally friendly.57 For the extraction of lignin from a lignocellulosic source, cellulases and hemicellulases are commonly used to hydrolyze carbohydrates, leaving lignin-enriched solid residues composed of lignin, carbohydrate, protein and ash.16,40,57,63 To improve the efficiency of the extraction and the purity of lignin, additional pretreatments including hot water treatment, ball-milling, mechanical refining, and ammonia fiber explosion are usually required to decrease the recalcitrance of lignocellulosic biomass and increase the digestibility of the polysaccharides.40,63 For example, lignin can be obtained by treating ball-milled wood with cellulolytic enzymes, which can hydrolyze carbohydrates.5 The obtained cellulolytic enzyme lignin has low purity due to the presence of protein and carbohydrates impurities.26 To improve the yield and purity of lignin, enzymatic treatment and acid hydrolysis can be combined to produce enzymatic mild acidolysis lignin.16,57
4. Degradation of lignin to chemicals and fuels
The degradation of lignin has been conducted for clarifying its composition and structure. It is also an efficient way to expose more reactive sites and enhance its reactivity.33,39,64 The degradation of lignin can be regarded as a top-down process to convert bulky lignin macromolecules into various small molecules such as phenols, aldehydes, and carboxylic acids.65–67 The degradation of lignin involves the selective cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds, which are relatively strong.68 In particular, the amount of β-O-4 bonds in lignin plays a crucial role in its degradation. It has been suggested that the maximum yield of the monomer that can be obtained is approximately equal to the square of the fraction of cleavable C–O bonds when only C–O bonds such as β-O-4 bonds are cleaved in the degradation.5 The primary products from the degradation of lignin are generally highly reactive and easy to recondense to form recalcitrant polymers.69 Moreover, the degradation products are complex, and the separation of the products is challenging. To achieve the highly selective degradation of lignin, the top-down processes investigated include thermochemical degradation,13 electrochemical degradation,67 photocatalytic degradation,12 and biological degradation70 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Brief summary of the degradation of lignin to chemicals and fuels. 
4.1. Thermochemical degradation
Thermochemical degradation, including pyrolysis, hydrogenolysis, oxidation, and gasification, has been used to decompose lignin (Table 2). The types of lignin, catalysts, solvents, temperature and pressure all need be screened to improve the yield and selectivity of the target products and reduce the formation of by-products. At present, technical lignin and model compounds representing lignin are commonly used for thermochemical degradation (Table 2). These thermochemical degradation processes are usually energy intensive. High temperature, high pressure, and catalyst are employed to cleave the C–O and C–C bonds in lignin. By thermochemical degradation, lignin can be converted into bio-oil rich in aromatic compounds such as vanillin and phenol, gas such as H2 and CO, and char, which can be further upgraded into chemicals and fuels (Table 2).
Table 2 Thermochemical degradation of lignin




Degradation reaction
Lignin type
Catalyst
Reaction conditions
Products
Cleavage of bonds
Ref.




Pyrolysis
Hydrolysis lignin
Zeolite X
400–800 °C
Bio-oil yield: 50.5%
—

75



Pyrolysis
Mild acidolysis lignin from corn stalk and bamboo
—
500 °C
4-Vinyl-phenol as the main pyrolysis product
Cleavage of C–O bonds coupling with decarboxylation reaction

99



Pyrolysis
Milled wood lignin
Zeolite catalysts
850 °C; catalyst-to-lignin ratio: 3:1
Bio-BTX with the highest selective yield: 56.56%
—

100



Hydrogenolysis
Catechyl lignin
Atomically dispersed Ru catalyst
200 °C; 3 MPa of H2; in MeOH; 4 h
A selectivity to propenylcatechol: 77%
Cleavage of C–O bonds in benzodioxane linkages

81



Hydrogenolysis
Sodium lignosulfonate
Ni3S2–CS catalysts
Catalytic hydrogenolysis of lignin model compounds; 260 °C; 2.0 MPa of N2; in iPrOH; 4 h
Ethylbenzene yield: 92%; phenol yield: 86%
Cleavage of C–O bonds in lignin

82



Hydrogenolysis
Alkaline lignin, dealkaline lignin, lignosulfonate
CuNiAl-based catalysts
140 or 160 °C; 80 min; in methanol; 60 °C or 180 °C; 80 min; in ethanol or isopropanol
Bio-oil with higher heating value and decreased molecular weights
Cleavage of C–O bonds in alkaline lignin, dealkaline lignin, and lignosulfonate

85



Hydrogenolysis
Alkali lignin
CuNiAl hydrotalcite-based catalyst
290 °C; 3 h; in ethanol–phenol solvent; phenol/lignin ratio: 0.8
Bio-oil yield: up to 81.8%; higher heating value: about 30 MJ kg−1
Cleavage of ether bonds in alkali lignin

101



Oxidation
Alkali lignin
Phosphotungstic acid and phosphomolybdic acid
Phosphomolybdic acid: 200 °C; 60 min; oxygen partial pressure: 10 bar; phosphotungstic acid: 175 °C; 60 min; oxygen partial pressure: 10 bar
Carboxylic acids yield: up to 45%
—

86



Oxidation
Protobind™ 1000 lignin
Cu/γ-Al2O3, Mn/γ-Al2O3, and Cu–Mn/γ-Al2O3
1 g of prot lignin; 10 g solvent (water or water/ethanol (wt/wt)); 100 mg of catalysts; in the presence of molecular oxygen
Bio-oil yield: 74.3 wt% in 50 wt% ethanol–50 wt% water (Cu/γ-Al2O3)
Selective breaking of β-O-4 and C–C (α–β) bonds

87



Oxidation
Kraft lignin, and γ-valerolactone extracted lignin
Au/Li–Al LDH
120 °C; 1 atm; 24 h; O2: 10 mL min−1
Yield of monomers (vanillin, vanillic acid, ferulic acid, and coniferyl alcohol): 40 wt%
—

89



Oxidation
Kraft lignin
Au/TiO2 and Pt/TiO2
150 °C; Pair: 20 bar; CNaOH: 10 g L−1; 1 h
Aromatics: vanillic acid, vanillin and syringaldehyde
—

88



Gasification
Lignin from Arundo donax
—
550 °C; 250 bar; feed flow rate of 10–60 mL min−1; in the supercritical water
Syngas with hydrogen and methane; a higher heating value greater than 40 MJ kg−1; liquid bio-products with glucose and aldehydes
—

102



Gasification
Dealkaline lignin
CuO–ZnO
600 °C; 1 g of lignin; 0.5 g of catalyst; 9 g of ultrapure water
Hydrogen yield: 29.62 mol kg−1
—

96



Gasification
Dealkaline lignin
Ni/3A, Ni/4A, Ni/5A, Ni/13X, and Ni/ZSM-5
450 °C; 30 min; 0.65 g of lignin; 12.35 g of water
Hydrogen selectivity: 42.61%; hydrogen yield: 5.63 mol kg−1
—

97






4.1.1. Pyrolysis. 
The pyrolysis of lignin refers to the energy-intensive thermal-decomposition of lignin without oxygen or with a limited amount of oxygen.71,72 Oxygen contributes to the rapid decomposition of lignin; however, the bond cleavage is limited to a certain extent without oxygen.72 Lignin is decomposed into bio-oil, char or gases (CO, CO2, H2, CH4, etc.), depending on the temperature, heating rate, time and reactor configuration.14,33,73 The decomposition of lignin starts at 280–500 °C by the cleavage of the C–O and C–C linkages.74 According to temperature and residence time, the pyrolysis of lignin can be divided into slow pyrolysis and fast pyrolysis. In slow pyrolysis, lignin is heated to around 500 °C at a slower heating rate, and the residence time is about 5 to 30 min.74 In fast pyrolysis, the temperature is between 600 °C and 1000 °C at a higher heating rate and the residence time is 0.5 to 5 s.14 In slow pyrolysis, the decomposition intermediates undergo recombination and coupling reactions within particles, which promote the formation of char and gas.73 However, fast pyrolysis favors the formation of liquid products and phenols due to the extensive decomposition of lignin and the ejection mechanism.73 To enhance the efficiency of pyrolysis, catalysts are employed such as zeolite Y, zeolite X, and ZSM-5.75 For example, bio-oil rich in monomeric phenolic compounds was obtained via the catalytic fast pyrolysis of hydrolysis lignin at 400–800 °C in the presence of zeolite X catalyst. The superb activity of the zeolite X catalyst was attributed to its strong acidity and low pore volume.75
The bio-oil from the pyrolysis of lignin contains phenolic compounds and is a liquid fuel of low quality. Bio-oil has a high content of O and water, resulting in many disadvantages such as high viscosity, low energy density, and high instability.76 Therefore, it is important to reduce the content of O and increase the H/C ratio of bio-oil.76 Due to harsh reaction conditions and low selectivity, it is difficult to separate specific chemicals from this type of bio-oil.77 In addition to bio-oil, char from the pyrolysis of lignin can be used to generate heat and power, and hydrogen can be purified from gas products as fuel.78


4.1.2. Hydrogenolysis. 
Lignin is hydrogenated between 300 °C and 600 °C in the presence of H2 as a reducing agent.33,63,66 During the process of hydrogenolysis, the C–O and C–C bonds in lignin are cleaved, resulting in the production of phenolic compounds (e.g., phenol and catechol), cyclic alcohols, and cycloalkanes.2,63,79 To accelerate hydrogenolysis, limit re-polymerization and reduce char formation, noble metal catalysts such as Pd, Ru and Pt, metal oxide catalysts such as CoMo/Al2O3 and SiO2·Al2O3, and other heterogeneous catalysts such as CuNiAl-based catalysts and Ni3S2–CS catalysts have been tested.14,33,63,80 It is important to engineer catalysts for tuning the competition between the cleavage of C–C and C–O bonds and the hydrogenation of aromatic groups.63,81 For example, an atomically dispersed Ru catalyst was used for the hydrogenolysis of catechyl lignin, where the catalyst could efficiently promote the breakage of the C–O bonds in benzodioxane structures, while selectively protecting the CC bonds from hydrogenation.81 Recently, to reduce costs and avoid operational risks and the excessive hydrogenation of H2, iPrOH, EtOH and MeOH as hydrogen-donor solvents are used as substitutes for H2 in the hydrogenolysis reaction.82–84 In addition to being a hydrogen donor, the hydrogen-donor solvent acts as a macromolecule solvolysis for the hydrogenolysis of lignin.79 For example, using iPrOH as a hydrogen-donor solvent in the presence of Ni3S2-doped carbon nanosheet catalyst, the selective hydrogenolysis of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethan-1-ol as a lignin model compound was carried out. The conversion of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethan-1-ol was 100%, and the yield of ethylbenzene and phenol was 92% and 86%, respectively.82 In addition, lignin hydrogenolysis was carried out in different hydrogen-donor solvents (MeOH, EtOH and iPrOH) over CuNiAl-based catalysts. Because MeOH has higher polarity than EtOH and iPrOH, it is more suitable for lignin hydrogenolysis.85 The highest yield of bio-oil was obtained over the CuNiAl-based catalyst with a metal ratio of 1.5:4.5:2 in MeOH. By adjusting the content of Cu, bio-oils with higher HHV and reduced molecular weights can be produced. However, the catalytic hydrogenolysis mechanism of lignin needs to be further explored.85


4.1.3. Oxidation. 
The oxidation of lignin brings about a sustainable route to produce alcohols, aldehydes, and carboxylic acids.2 Various oxidants, including oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, ozone, chlorine, chlorine dioxide, nitrobenzene, and peroxy acids have been used to cleave C–C bonds in the side-chain or aromatic ring.5,83 In the absence of a catalyst, the reaction suffers from low selectivity towards the target product and excessive oxidation.33 Thus, the development of catalytic lignin oxidation is beneficial for the valorization of lignin. Catalysts such as polyoxometalates,86 metal oxides,87 and supported noble metal catalysts88 have been evaluated. During the partial oxidation of lignin, using phosphomolybdic acid as a catalyst at 200 °C, the yield of carboxylic acids was up to 45%, and the conversion of lignin reached 95%.86 Compared with Mn/γ-Al2O3 and Cu–Mn/γ-Al2O3 catalysts, Cu/γ-Al2O3 achieved the maximum yield of bio-oil (74.3 wt%) from the oxidation of prot lignin in an ethanol–water (50/50) mixture.87 Moreover, in the presence of Cu/γ-Al2O3, the maximum conversion (77.3 wt%) of lignin was obtained in ethanol–water (75/25) solvent. The catalyst promoted the selective cleavage of the β-O-4 and C–C bonds, and bio-oil was produced, including phenolic compounds, heterocyclic and carboxylic acid.87 AuNPs/Li–Al LDH (layered double hydroxide) catalyst was used for the oxidation of kraft lignin and organosolv lignin extracted by γ-valerolactone.89 Using DMF as a solvent, for organosolv lignin extracted by γ-valerolactone and kraft lignin, the yields of the obtained aromatic monomers including vanillin, vanillic acid, ferulic acid, and coniferyl alcohol were 40 wt% and 10 wt%, respectively.
The oxidation of lignin generally produces vanillin, syringaldehyde, p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, and carboxylic acids.2,48 Vanillin is a phenolic aldehyde and can be used as a flavoring and feedstock for the synthesis of fine chemicals and polymers.2,33 Vanillin can be produced from lignin oxidation with oxygen as an oxidant in concentrate aqueous solution of NaOH.5 The yield of vanillin depends on the lignin source and extraction method. Generally, lignin with a high content of β-O-4 linkages is preferred.1 In 1936, vanillin was industrially produced with lignosulfonate as the lignin source. At present, industrial lignin-derived vanillin is produced by the Norwegian company Borregaard.5
Syringaldehyde and p-hydroxybenzaldehyde are used for the production of pharmaceuticals and spices.90 Carboxylic acids, including vanillic acid, syringic acid, and p-hydroxybenzoic acid, are generally considered as the product of excessive oxidation.76 They are used as raw materials for pharmaceuticals, food products and polymers.2


4.1.4. Gasification. 
Through gasification, lignin can be converted into gases including H2, CO2, CO and CH4.80 This mixture of gases can be processed to produce electricity, pure hydrogen, and chemicals.78,91 In addition, the composition of gas products can be altered by reforming, water–gas shift and methanation reactions.78 Catalytic gasification of lignin in supercritical water seems to be promising for obtaining hydrogen-rich gas.92 The supercritical water acts as both a reactant and reaction medium, and thus lignin with a high water content can be used directly without drying.93–95 In the process of supercritical water gasification, catalysts play a role in lowering the reaction temperature and improving the gasification efficiency and hydrogen selectivity.93,95 Alkali catalysts such as KOH, NaOH, K2CO3, Na2CO3, and Ca(OH)2, metal catalysts such as Ni, Pt, Ru and Rh, and metal oxide catalysts such as CuO–ZnO and Fe2O3–Cr2O3 have been proven to be effective for the supercritical water gasification of lignin.95,96 For example, an Ni catalyst showed high catalytic activity in supercritical water gasification. Some Ni catalysts prepared by Ni supported on different zeolites (3A, 4A, 5A, 13X and ZSM-5) were used for the supercritical water gasification of dealkaline lignin.97 The catalytic activity followed the order of Ni/ZSM-5 < Ni/13X < Ni/5A < Ni/3A < Ni/4A. The high catalytic activity of Ni/4A was attributed to its suitable size, which can provide more active sites for lignin gasification. In the presence of 10 wt% Ni/4A, the selectivity for hydrogen was 42.61% and the yield of hydrogen was 5.63 mol kg−1 at 450 °C for 30 min.97 When the CuO–ZnO catalyst was used for supercritical water gasification of lignin, the gasification efficiency and yield of hydrogen were both enhanced.96 At 600 °C, the highest yield of hydrogen from lignin gasification was 29.62 mol kg−1. The catalytic mechanism of CuO–ZnO was proposed, that is, CuO was reduced to Cu and the reduced Cu could accelerate the water–gas shift reaction, carbon conversion and hydrogen production. ZnO acted as a structural stabilizer and promoter to improve the gasification efficiency.96
The generation pathways of CO2, CH4 and H2via lignin gasification in supercritical water have been explored through molecular dynamics.98 For CH4 generation, the CHx radical generated from the disassembly of C-containing structures gains H atoms to form CH4. For H2 generation, the H ion obtains another H atom from H-containing structures to produce H2. For CO2 generation, the CHO radical is oxidized by OH radicals to form CHO2, and then CHO2 loses H to generate CO2.98

4.2. Electrochemical degradation
The electrochemical degradation of lignin is considered promising conversion technology because of its low cost, environmental friendliness and mild reaction conditions.103,104 Electrochemical degradation involves electron transfer between the lignin substrate and working electrode, while the catalyst remains immobilized on the electrode surface.67,105 The rate and product selectivity of the electrochemical degradation of lignin can be controlled by the synergistic interactions among the current density, electrolyte, temperature and electrode material.104,106

4.2.1. Electrochemical oxidation. 
The electrochemical oxidation of lignin does not require molecular oxidants.107 Moreover, the oxidation products can be adjusted by controlling the oxidation potential and reaction time.105 At present, the major challenge associated with this process is its low efficiency and high cost of electrode materials, which are often composed of noble metals with inherit stability and catalytic activity.108,109 Thus, it is essential to search for novel electrode materials for the economical electrochemical oxidation of lignin.
For the electrochemical oxidation of lignin, the effects of the working electrode and temperature have been investigated. Different TiO2 nanotube electrodes were prepared through anodization.108 By controlling the anodization time, the nanotube length was altered, and the double layer capacitance increased as nanotube length increased. When TiO2 nanotubes with a length of about 13.5 μm were used, the lowest impedance and the highest oxidation efficiency of lignin were obtained. In terms of temperature, the electrochemical oxidation rate of lignin increased with an increase in temperature. Compared with the pure Pt electrode, the TiO2 nanotube electrode showed higher electrocatalytic activity and stability.108
PbO2 has the characteristics of good electronic conductivity and high oxidation power, showing the potential for electrochemical oxidation.109 When the Pb/PbO2 anode was used for the electrochemical oxidation of cornstalk lignin, the C–C and C–O–C bonds of cornstalk lignin were cracked by the oxidation of atomic oxygen radical anions from Pb/PbO2 anode.105 The oxidation products were produced, including 4-methoxy-3-methylphenol, 1-(3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-ethanone and 1-(2-hydroxy-5-methylphenyl)-ethanone.
In addition to being electrode materials, PbO2-based electrocatalysts showed high catalytic activity for the electrochemical oxidation of lignin. However, the uniform deposition of PbO2 nanoparticles on the substrate is challenging. Bateni et al.109 developed β-PbO2/multi-walled nanotube electrocatalysts through a wet-chemistry method. When the mass fraction of β-PbO2 was 33.3 wt%, the resulting β-PbO2/multi-walled nanotube electrocatalyst showed the highest catalytic activity and stability for the electrochemical oxidation of lignin. The oxidation products such as vanillin, methyl salicylate, 2,4-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-phenol and 1,3-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-benzene were obtained. To convert lignin into value-added compounds more economically and environmentally, future research should focus on the development of active lead-free electrocatalysts.109
The commonly used electrolyte for the electrochemical oxidation of lignin is aqueous electrolyte.106 However, in aqueous media, there are some disadvantages such as only the use of hydrophilic lignin, use of many additives and the limited electrochemical window for water.110 Thus, to avoid these problems, non-aqueous electrolytes such as ionic liquid (IL) and deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have been studied.106 In addition to their intrinsic ionic conductivity, ILs can be used as solvent-free electrolytes for the electrochemical oxidation of lignin. Rauber et al.110 performed the electrochemical oxidation of lignin in protic triethylammonium methanesulfonate using mixed metal oxide electrodes. As a solvent-free electrolyte without additives, the protic IL exhibited high electrochemical stability. Furthermore, due to the hydrophilicity of the IL, it could be easily separated and recovered by aqueous extraction. In addition, a large number of aromatic compounds such as vanillin, vanillic acid, benzoic acid was produced.110
NaOH is a commonly used electrolyte. Its strong alkalinity is conducive for the solubilisation of lignin and provides high conductivity. However, strong alkaline electrolyte may be partly responsible for excessive oxidation and high pH limits the choice of electrode materials.111 DESs can be used as an alternative to NaOH electrolyte for the electrochemical oxidation of lignin. Di Marino et al.111 performed the electrochemical oxidation of lignin using a DES as an electrolyte, which was synthesized by mixing choline chloride with urea or ethylene glycol. The main products from the electrochemical oxidation of lignin were guaiacol, vanillin, acetovanillone and syringaldeyhde.111 Further work needs to focus on the optimization of electrode materials, the recovery of the DES, and the quantification of the products.


4.2.2. Electrochemical reduction. 
Electrochemical reduction, which is known as electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH) on the cathode, has gained increasing interest.103,112 ECH can be used to saturate adsorbed lignin on the catalyst with chemisorbed hydrogen generated from proton and/or the reduction of water.103,112 ECH has some advantages such as mild reaction conditions, simple operation and controllable product selectivity.103,112,113
In ECH, the water splitting reaction can produce green hydrogen without an external hydrogen supply. The electrolyte plays a role in improving electrical conductivity for the water splitting reaction. The electrocatalyst gives a large active surface area for ECH.112 The Faraday efficiency can be improved by controlling the pH of the electrolyte and selecting a suitable catalyst. Wijaya et al.113 investigated the synergistic effects between the catalyst (Pt/C, Ru/C and Pd/C) and electrolyte on the electrocatalytic hydrogenation–hydrogenolysis of lignin model compounds (phenol and guaiacol) (Fig. 3). The catholyte was acidic H2SO4 or neutral NaCl paired with acidic anolyte (H2SO4). For the electrocatalytic hydrogenation–hydrogenolysis of phenol, owing to its higher surface area and metal dispersion, the Pt/C catalyst showed better hydrogenation activity both in acid–acid and neutral–acid pairs. In the case of guaiacol, different catalytic activity was observed in acid–acid and neutral–acid pairs. In the acid–acid pair, the catalytic activity followed the order of Pt/C > Pd/C ≈ Ru/C. The pH of the electrolyte affected the stability and activity of the catalyst. In the neutral–acid pair, because a high pH condition was more favorable for the Ru/C catalyst, the catalytic activity followed the order of Pt/C > Ru/C > Pd/C.113
 Fig. 3  Electrocatalytic hydrogenation–hydrogenolysis of guaiacol. Adapted and Reprinted with permission from [Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH]: [Springer Nature] [ref. 113], [copyright] (2020). 
The electrocatalytic hydrogenation of lignin is a promising method to produce high-value methoxy chemicals. The ternary carbon-felt supported RhPtRu electrocatalysts were prepared for the electrocatalytic hydrogenation of lignin monomer guaiacol.114 At a current density of 50 mA cm−2, 2-methoxycyclohexanol and 2-methoxycyclohexanone were obtained with the selectivity of 62.0% and 29.1%, respectively. Moreover, the Faraday efficiency was 62.8%.

4.3. Photocatalytic degradation
The photocatalytic degradation of lignin by selectively breaking C–O or C–C bonds under mild conditions is a promising strategy to produce aromatic compounds.13 Generally, there are two types of photocatalytic cleavage of Cβ–O bonds in lignin. In the first type, the CαO intermediate (ketone form) is produced initially, and then the Cβ–O bond is broken through proton hydrogen (Fig. 4a).115–117 The other type is the formation of the Cα radical intermediate initially by an oxidation reaction, followed by the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond via photogenerated electrons and H from Cα–H (Fig. 4b).115–117 The latter is simpler and more energy-saving because the separation and purification of the ketone (CαO) intermediate are not required.115
 Fig. 4  Two types of photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in lignin. (a) Two holes/electrons process. (b) One hole/electron process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
It has been reported that the photogenerated holes and electrons produced by the photocatalyst can accelerate the cleavage of the β-O-4 bond in lignin.12 In recent advances, several promising photocatalysts, including metal sulfides, metal oxides, and composite photocatalysts, have been developed for the selective degradation of lignin. Metal sulfide photocatalysts such as ZnmIn2Sm+3 and CdS have attracted interest owing to their good visible-light response and tunable photophysical and photocatalytic properties.12,68 For example, Lin et al.68 used zinc–indium–sulfide photocatalysts (ZnmIn2Sm+3) for breaking the β-O-4 bonds in lignin under visible-light irradiation to produce functionalized aromatics. By controlling the atomic ratio of Zn/In, the energy band structure of zinc–indium–sulfide photocatalysts can be adjusted to provide adequate visible-light absorption and suitable redox capability. Due to its appropriate energy band structure, Zn4In2S7 made from a low-temperature hydrothermal method exhibited the best photocatalytic performance for the cleavage of β-O-4 bond. Aromatic monomers such as ketones and alcohols with a yield of 18.4 wt% were obtained through the photocatalytic degradation of organosolv birch lignin.68 In addition, the –SH groups on the surface of the Zn4In2S7 photocatalyst can be firstly activated by photogenerated holes to form thiol radicals, which selectively abstract H from Cα–H to form the Cα radical intermediate (Fig. 5a).116 Meanwhile, the photogenerated electrons reductively break the adjacent Cβ–O bond to produce ketones and phenols (Fig. 5b).68,116 In addition, a minor process occurred, that is, the photocatalytic removal of the H present in Cα–H and Cα–OH to produce 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanone.116
 Fig. 5  Photocatalytic degradation of organosolv lignin over Zn4In2S7-based photocatalyst. (a) Schematic of the photocatalytic route. (b) Possible routes to break the Cβ–O bond. GO: graphene oxide; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; and ZIS-100: photocatalyst prepared by adding 100 μL of graphene oxide to the solution. Reprinted from ref. 116, copyright (2021), with permission from Elsevier. 
In the case of CdS, the reduction of photogenerated electrons was slower than the oxidation of photogenerated holes in the conduction band. Consequently, a large amount of photogenerated electrons accumulated, reducing its photocatalytic efficiency for the degradation of lignin.116 An Ag+-exchanged CdS photocatalyst (Ag2S@CdS) was developed for the photocatalytic degradation of lignin.117 As the Fermi level of CdS was changed by Ag+ exchange, the obtained Ag2S@CdS photocatalyst could enable the photogeneration of electrons and holes to effectively break the β-O-4 bonds. In the presence of the Ag2S(2%)@CdS photocatalyst, the conversion yield of the lignin model (2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol) was about 99% under 6 W blue LED illumination, and acetophenone and phenol with high selectivity were generated.117
CdS quantum dots (QDs) seem to be effective catalysts for selectively cleaving the β-O-4 linkages in lignin.51,118 The colloidal character of CdS QDs enables them to be in close contact with the solid lignocellulosic biomass. Using CdS QDs as a catalyst, the native lignin in birch woodmeal was efficiently converted into aromatic ketones with a yield of 27 wt% at room temperature.51 Then the CdS QD catalyst could be recycled via an aggregation–colloidization strategy (Fig. 6). Moreover, hemicellulose and cellulose could be converted into xylose and glucose by acidolysis and enzymolysis, respectively. The yields of xylose and glucose were 84% and 91%, respectively.51
 Fig. 6  Photocatalytic conversion of lignin in birch woodmeal over CdS QD catalysts. Reprinted by permission from [Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH]: [Springer Nature] [ref. 51], [copyright] (2018). 
The surface organic ligands on CdS QDs can affect their photocatalytic activities. To enhance the photocatalytic efficiency of CdS QDs, Wu et al.118 studied the photocatalytic degradation of native lignin by manipulating the organic ligands on the surface of CdS QDs. It was found that the catalytic performance of CdS QDs strongly depended on the structure of the ligands. The hydrophilic/hydrophobic property of ligands affected the formation of a colloidal solution, thereby affecting the contact of the CdS QDs with the native lignin. In addition, the anchor group and alkyl length of the ligands played a key role in the charge-transfer process. The transformation of various technical lignins into aromatics could be catalyzed by CdS QDs with 3-mercaptopropionic acid ligand under visible light. The yield of aromatics increased with an increase in the content of β-O-4 linkages in lignin.118
TiO2 is an effective photocatalyst under UV light for the degradation of lignin.119 However, due to its high energy band gap, the photoinduced electrons and holes are more likely to recombine, and radiation energy is lost.119,120 Thus, to enhance its photocatalytic activity, Srisasiwimon et al.119 designed a composite photocatalyst (TiO2/lignin) by modifying TiO2 with lignin-based carbon for the photocatalytic conversion of lignin. Compared with the pristine TiO2, the TiO2/lignin composite photocatalyst had a higher surface area, smaller crystal size and efficiently reduced charge recombination. The TiO2/lignin composite photocatalyst with a ratio of TiO2 to lignin of 1:0.5 showed a lignin conversion of up to 40.28% under UVA irradiation for 5 h. Phenolic compounds and aromatic hydrocarbons such as vanillin, 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde and benzoic acid were obtained.119
In addition, the photocatalyst obtained by combining carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and TiO2 could be promising for the degradation of lignin. Sharma et al.120 used the hydrothermal technique to prepare a TiO2/CQD photocatalyst for the photocatalytic degradation of lignin. The TiO2/CQD catalyst showed the best photocatalytic activity for the degradation of alkali lignin under solar light illumination within 4 h. The photocatalytic efficiency was up to 99%, resulting in the formation of 3-methoxybenzoic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid. The introduction of CQDs hindered the recombination and rapid transfer of photogenerated electrons and holes, thus resulting in good photocatalytic efficiency.120
4.4. Biological degradation
Microorganism-mediated biological degradation usually requires relatively mild reaction conditions, lowering the facility requirements and avoiding the formation of char.39,70 Fungus is one of the most studied microbes for the biological degradation of lignin. Inherently, fungus can secret enzymes such as laccase, lignin peroxidase (LiP), manganese peroxidase (MnP) and versatile peroxidase (VP).121 For example, white rot fungi can produce laccase, LiP, and MnP to deconstruct lignin into CO2 and H2O.122
Laccase is a blue-copper oxidase, and white rot fungi are the main laccase producers.39 Laccase can directly catalyze the oxidation of phenolic compounds with O2 as the oxidant. With the help of some chemical mediators such as 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid and 1-hydroxy-benzotriazole, laccase can degrade non-phenolic compounds (Fig. 7a).39,121,123 Also, 80–90% of the lignin structure could be degraded by laccase.39 LiP is a heme-containing peroxidase, which was first isolated from Phanerochaete chrysosporium.72 LiP can catalytically decompose both non-phenolic and phenolic compounds. During the degradation process, veratryl alcohol and H2O2 are employed as the electron donor and cofactor, respectively. Native (LiP)P–Fe(III) is oxidized by H2O2 to form (LiP)P˙–Fe(IV), which receives one electron to form (LiP)P–Fe(IV). Finally, (LiP)P–Fe(IV) changes back to (LiP)P–Fe(III) by gaining one more electron from the lignin substrate (Fig. 7b).39,123 MnP can catalytically convert Mn2+ into Mn3+ and promote the oxidation of lignin phenolic compounds. (MnP)P–Fe(III) initially reacts with H2O2 to form (MnP)P˙–Fe(IV), and an Mn2+ ion donates one electron to form (MnP)P–Fe(IV). By obtaining one electron from Mn2+, (MnP)P–Fe(IV) can become (MnP)P–Fe(III) (Fig. 7c).123 VP is a hybrid enzyme and its catalytic mechanism is similar to that of LiP and MnP. It can oxidize Mn2+ like MnP, and oxidize various substrates such as LiP (Fig. 7d).39
 Fig. 7  Catalytic mechanism of lignin degradation mediated by enzymes. (a) Laccase. (b) Lignin peroxidase. (c) Manganese peroxidase. (d) Versatile peroxidase. Reprinted from ref. 123 with permission from Springer Nature under the terms of the Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license, copyright (2021). 
The bacterial degradation of lignin has attracted significant interest due to their high tolerance to temperature, pH and limited oxygen, and easy genetic modification.70,72,124 Generally, bacteria and fungi use similar enzymatic systems. Various bacteria such as Pseudomonas, Bacillus, and Rhodococcus from soil, wastewater, animal gut, sludge and wood have been identified for the degradation of lignin.70,123 For example, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SL-7 isolated from tobacco straw was used for the degradation of tobacco straw lignin.125Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SL-7 can secret laccase, LiP and MnP. After 15 days of liquid fermentation, the bacteria could degrade 28.55% of lignin in tobacco straw, and phenolic and quinone compounds were produced. In addition, owing to the degradation of lignin by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SL-7, the fertilizer efficacy and stability of the compost were enhanced.125
Through biological degradation, lignin and its derivatives can be converted into biofuels (biomethane and lipid), biodegradable bioplastic (polyhydroxyalkanoates), biofertilizers and value-added chemicals such as vanillin, BTX, muconate, pyruvate and L-lactate.70,72 However, despite the significant progress, a clear understanding of the mechanism for the biological degradation of lignin is still insufficient. By means of genetic engineering and metabolic engineering, future research needs to explore more fungi and bacteria for the degradation of lignin.
4.5. The influence of lignin structure/feedstock on degradation
Understanding the relationship between lignin structure/feedstock and degradation is of great significance for the valorization of lignin. The content of S/G/H units, the type and content of chemical bonds, and elemental composition of lignin all influence the degradation of lignin. For example, for three types of MWL produced from Chinese fir, poplar and corn stover, respectively, that from Chinese fir had the highest calorific value (23.05 MJ kg−1) because it had the highest carbon content (59.90%) and the lowest oxygen content (33.78%).100 In the catalytic pyrolysis over the HZSM-5 (25) catalyst, for the one from poplar, the highest selectivity yield of BTX was achieved due to its highest content of β-O-4 bonds (53.90%) and highest molecular weight (2778 g mol−1).100 In addition, for lignins isolated from pine, eucalyptus, and corn stalk and bamboo by mild acidolysis process, they behaved differently during the fast pyrolysis process.99 Owing to the different selective cleavage of chemical bonds in fast pyrolysis, lignin from different sources led to different aromatic compounds. The lignin from eucalyptus had G and S units, and high contents of 1,2-benzenediol and 2-methoxy-4-vinylphenol were produced by pyrolysis. For lignin rich in G units from pine, 1,2-benzenediol and 4-methyl-1,2-benzenediol were the main pyrolysis products. Lignin from corn stalk and bamboo contained G, S, and H units, and moieties of tricin and hydroxycinnamic acids, and 4-vinylphenol derived from the cleavage of C–O linkages coupling with decarboxylation reaction was primarily obtained.99 As indicated by these findings, understanding the relationship between the characteristic structure of lignin and degradation will provide some guidance for the valorization of lignin and prediction of the products.
The influence of lignin sources on the products was also observed in the degradation of lignin. kraft lignin from southern pine wood (K1), kraft lignin from eucalyptus (K2), kraft lignin from pine wood (K3), and soda lignin from wheat straw had different S/G ratios.126 When lignin with a higher S/G ratio was depolymerized in supercritical ethanol, a low yield of char was obtained. The S/G ratio of monomers was related to the S/G ratio of lignin. For the K1 and K3 lignins, a progressive increase in propyl guaiacol was observed, which was associated with their higher content of guaiacyl. For the K2 and soda lignins, more propyl syringol was produced, and a side chain of carboxylic acid in the homosyringic acid was gradually formed. In addition, the yields of monomer and oligomer were not controlled by the cleavage of the β-O-4 bonds.126
The above-mentioned studies indicate that the lignin structure/feedstock have an effect on the degradation and product distribution. There is the relationship between the lignin feedstock and its susceptibility to degradation.127 For the fractionated alkali lignins, their properties showed strong correlations. In particular, lignin with a higher S/G ratio presented a higher content of β-O-4 bonds, higher molecular weights, and lower content of phenolic hydroxyl groups. Then, thioacidolysis, hydrogenolysis, and oxidation of fractionated alkali lignins were performed. It has been found that the variation in lignin structure, specifically the content of β-O-4 bonds, had a remarkable influence on the yields of aromatic monomer. An accurate model of the correlation of the structure of lignin and the susceptibility to degradation could help predict the yield of aromatic monomers. The maximum yield is the square of the content of β-O-4 bonds.127 Thus, to produce a high content of aromatic monomers, preserving the high content of β-O-4 bonds in the extraction process is important. Nonetheless, the in-depth relationship between the yield of monomer and β-O-4 bonds remains elusive and needs to be explored in detail.
5. Functionalization strategies for lignin
Lignin has diverse and abundant active functional groups, allowing its further functionalization.43 Here, the bottom-up functionalization strategies refer to the methods of introducing active functional parts into lignin and changing the nature of its active sites, thereby improving its reactivity.14 The strategies for the functionalization of lignin mainly take advantage of its aromatic rings, hydroxyl groups, and methoxy groups. Based on the modified sites, the functionalization of lignin can be divided into functionalization of aromatic rings, functionalization of hydroxyl groups, and functionalization of methoxy groups. Some commonly used functionalization strategies of lignin include hydroxymethylation, amination, sulfonation, sulfomethylation, phenolization, esterification and demethylation (Fig. 8). The resultant functionalized lignin has more active functional groups and reactive sites, and thus the reactivity of lignin is improved. In addition, graft copolymerization, including ring-opening polymerization and atom-transfer radical polymerization, is used to prepare lignin-based copolymers by grafting other functional polymers (Fig. 8). Due to the synergistic effect between lignin and functional polymers, the mechanical properties, solubility in organic solvents, and processing ability of the obtained lignin-based materials are essentially improved.128,129
 Fig. 8  Summary of the functionalization strategies for lignin. 
5.1. Functionalization of aromatic ring of lignin

5.1.1. Hydroxymethylation. 
Hydroxymethylation is an effective method to increase the content of hydroxyl groups in lignin, thereby increasing its reactivity.130 In the hydroxymethylation reaction, lignin reacts with formaldehyde in an alkaline medium and hydroxymethyl groups are introduced into the ortho positions of phenolic hydroxyl groups via the Lederer–Manasse reaction (Fig. 8).130,131 The hydroxymethylation reaction is affected by the type of lignin, lignin/formaldehyde ratio, and temperature.130,132 High temperature, long reaction time, and strong alkaline will cause the condensation of hydroxymethylated lignin. Mild reaction conditions will result in a low degree of hydroxymethylation.133 Xu et al.133 determined the optimal reaction conditions for hydroxymethylation of alkali lignin. When the reaction temperature was 80 °C, the reaction time was 3 h, the pH value was 11, and the mass ratio of alkali lignin/formaldehyde was 6:1, the content of hydroxymethyl groups of the alkali lignin reached 2.32%.
Lignin has a polyphenolic structure similar to phenol resin.134 Through the modification of hydroxymethylation, the reactivity of lignin is improved. Hydroxymethylated lignin can partially replace petrol-based phenol in the production of phenol-formaldehyde resins.134 In addition, due to its high content of aliphatic hydroxyl groups, hydroxymethylated lignin can be used as a partial substitute for petrol-based polyols to react with isocyanate to prepare lignin-based polyurethane adhesives.130 In the rubber industry, hydroxymethylated lignin can be used as a filler to improve the processing ability and mechanical properties of rubber.131


5.1.2. Amination. 
Amine groups can be introduced into the ortho position of the phenolic hydroxyl groups in lignin by amination. The Mannich reaction is a commonly used amination method. Lignin reacts with amine and formaldehyde to introduce amine group under acidic, neutral or alkaline conditions (Fig. 8).74,135 Under acidic conditions, the introduced amine group is ionizable and positively charged.135 In the amination process, the number of active amine groups introduced is difficult to control.136 Through first epoxidation of phenolic hydroxyl group of lignin, the content of phenolic hydroxyl group decreased. Then the epoxidized lignin was subjected to amination treatment, and aminated lignin with more primary amine and secondary amine groups could be obtained.136 In addition, the content of amine groups introduced in the aminated lignin is affected by the type of amine reagent. Four amine reagents including diethylene triamine, propylene diamine, ethylene diamine and ammonia for the amination of kraft lignin were studied.137 For ammonia, the amount of amine group introduced was the lowest (1.2 mmol g−1). Compared with other amine reagents, the benzoxazine produced by the Mannich reaction of lignin with ammonia was more likely to form a Mannich base. Therefore, the obtained aminated lignin may undergo intramolecular cross-linking at a higher degree and less reactive sites were reserved for the introduction of more ammonia. For diethylene triamine, intramolecular cross-linking may also occur to a greater extent, and thus the amount of amine group introduced was less (1.7 mmol g−1). For propylene diamine and ethylene diamine, due to the high steric hindrance of the aminated lignin, the degree of cross-linking was slightly lower, and thus the amount of amine group introduced was higher (1.8 and 2.0 mmol g−1).137


5.1.3. Sulfonation. 
In the sulfonation reaction, lignin usually reacts with sulfuric acid or sodium sulfite to introduce sulfonate groups into the aromatic ring or side chain of lignin, respectively, resulting in sulfonated lignin (Fig. 8).14,138 The properties of sulfonated lignin are affected by the sulfonation reagents used. When phenolated lignin was sulfonated using sodium sulfite and sulfuric acid as sulfonation reagents, respectively, the two types of sulfonated lignin showed different charge density, solubility and pH value.138 Using sulfuric acid as the sulfonation reagent, the obtained sulfonated lignin had a charge density of 3.12 meq. g−1, which was attributed to the addition of sulfonation sites on the phenolic ring during the phenolation treatment of lignin. For the sulfonated lignin generated from sodium sulfite treatment, it had a charge density of 1.20 meq. g−1, which was attributed to the steric hindrance and occupation of the a-position. Moreover, owing to its high charge density and the content of sulfonate groups, the sulfonated lignin generated from sulfuric acid treatment was soluble in a wider pH range.138 In addition, the properties of sulfonated lignin are related to its sulfonation degree and molecular weight.139 Some sulfonation reagents with different aliphatic chain lengths were used for the sulfonation of lignin, including 1,4-butanesultone, 1,3-propanesultone, sodium chloroethyl sulfonate and sodium bisulfite. Because 1,4-butanesultone has a long aliphatic chain, sulfonated lignin obtained from 1,4-butanesultone had the highest molecular weight (7190 Da) and content of sulfonate groups (1.59 mmol g−1). Owing to its high molecular weight and content of sulfonate groups, sulfonated lignin can prevent the agglomeration of dye particles and provide electrostatic repulsion to stabilize and disperse dye particles.139


5.1.4. Sulfomethylation. 
Sulfomethylation introduces methylene sulfonate groups into the aromatic ring of lignin through the treatment of sodium sulfite and formaldehyde (Fig. 8).140,141 By sulfomethylation, sulfomethylated lignin with higher water-solubility and charge density can be obtained.141,142 To improve the sulfomethylation reactivity of lignin, an aqueous solution of NaOH/urea was used to activate enzymatic hydrolysis lignin.143 The hydrogen bonds and ether bonds between the lignin–carbohydrate complexes were broken, resulting in the formation of enzymatic hydrolysis lignin with a higher content of phenolic hydroxyl groups and lower aggregation degree. Due to the existence of more reactive sites and less steric hindrance, the sulfonation degree of enzymatic hydrolysis lignin increased by 62.60% after activation for 12 h.143
Sulfomethylated lignin with a high charge density can be used as a dispersant to improve the fluidity of a cement paste.144 In addition, owing to the negatively charged sulfonate groups on sulfomethylated lignin, the electrostatic interactions and π–π stacking interactions between lignin and cation dyes can be improved in the adsorption process.145 Moreover, sulfomethylated lignin can be used as a water reducer for concrete because of its low surface tension and zeta potential.146

5.2. Functionalization of hydroxyl group of lignin

5.2.1. Phenolation. 
In the phenolation reaction, lignin reacts with phenol in the presence of an acid catalyst such as sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acid, resulting in the substitution of aliphatic hydroxyl groups by phenol (Fig. 8).147–149 The phenol/lignin ratio, acid charge, and reaction temperature have a significant effect on the degree of phenolation.147,150 When phenolation of Klason lignin was performed using the microwave heating method, the phenolation rate increased with a higher phenol/lignin ratio.151 Moreover, with an increase in the phenol/lignin ratio, the molecular weight and Tg of the phenolated lignin decreased, which was attributed to the enhanced decomposition of lignin and the inhibition of its cross-linking reaction. In addition, owing to the increase in the number of phenol groups and the decrease in molecular weight, phenolated lignin showed higher solubility in tetrahydrofuran and methanol than Klason lignin.151 When lignin extracted from wheat straw was phenolated, the high acid charge was conducive to the introduction of phenol.147 For the temperature of phenolation, in the range of 70 °C to 110 °C, the degree of phenolation increased with an increase in temperature, which can be explained by the solubility of lignin in phenol.150 Phenolated lignin has more phenolic hydroxyl groups and reactive sites, thereby improving the reactivity of lignin as a phenol substitute.


5.2.2. Esterification. 
The hydroxyl groups of lignin react with acid, acid anhydride and acyl chloride in the presence of catalysts such as pyridine, 4-dimethylaminopyridine, 1-or N-methylimidazole, 2-methylimidazole, and imidazole, yielding esterified lignin.152,153 Both the aliphatic and phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin take part in the esterification reaction (Fig. 8).154 In the esterification, different esterifying agents and catalysts may lead to different esterification efficiencies. For esterifying agents, the reactivity of non-cyclic anhydrides was higher than that of cyclic anhydrides. Both the aliphatic hydroxyl and phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin reacted with non-cyclic anhydrides, while only aliphatic hydroxyl groups reacted with cyclic anhydrides. Moreover, when the length of the carbon chain and the number of unsaturated bonds in the acyl groups increased, the reactivity of the esterifying agent decreased.153 For catalysts, 4-dimethylamino pyridine, sodium acetate, and sulfuric acid all could enhance the esterification efficiency.154 The esterification efficiency followed the order of 4-dimethylamino pyridine > sodium acetate > sulfuric acid. For sulfuric acid, it could remove water from the lignin model compounds due to its strong water absorption. The obtained water could hydrolyze the esterifying agent. Furthermore, in this dehydration process, most of the sulfuric acid catalyst was consumed, resulting in low esterification efficiency.154
Esterification can modify the hydrogen bond network of lignin, add additional functional groups, and change its properties such as solubility, Tg and hydrophobicity.155 For example, when lignin was esterified by carboxylic acid anhydrides with different chain lengths, with an increase in chain length from C2 to C6, the weight average molar mass and hydrophobicity of the esterified lignin increased, while the Tg and polarity decreased.156 In addition, by esterification, esterified lignin derivatives with different structures and Tg were obtained (Fig. 9).155 Firstly, hydroxyethyl derivatization with ethylene carbonate was performed to improve the thermal stability of lignin. Then, propionic acid was used to quench the side reaction between ethylene carbonate and hydroxyethyl lignin, and react with aliphatic hydroxyl groups to produce esterified lignin. Because water is miscible with propionic acid and ethylene carbonate, the obtained homogeneous system was fractionated by downward precipitation with water. The addition of water could realize downward precipitation fractionation based on the molecular weight of the esterified lignin derivatives. The conformations of the esterified lignin derivatives varied from rod structures to dense spheres. Over 50% of esterified lignin derivatives had a lower Tg than the unmodified lignin. Moreover, the solubility of the esterified lignin derivatives in acetone, tetrahydrofuran, and ethyl acetate was improved.155
 Fig. 9  One-pot route to produce esterified lignin derivatives with subsequent downward precipitation fractionation. F1: fraction 1; F2: lignin fraction 2; F3: lignin fraction 3; F4: lignin fraction 4; F5: lignin fraction 5; and HELignin: hydroxyethyl lignin. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence, copyright 2021. 

5.3. Functionalization of methoxy groups of lignin
Generally, the ortho-positions of the phenolic hydroxyl groups in lignin are substituted by methoxy groups.157 Demethylation is a method involving replacing the methoxy groups with phenolic hydroxyl groups (Fig. 8). Demethylation can enhance the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups and hydrophilicity of lignin.158
Various demethylation reagents such as thiols and Lewis acids have been used for the demethylation of lignin.159 When 1-dodecanethiol, hydroiodic acid, and iodocyclohexane were used as demethylation reagents, 1-dodecanethiol treatment mainly led to the cleavage of the β-aryl ethers instead of demethylation. Hydroiodic acid treatment increased the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups, and both the demethylation of lignin and cleavage of the lignin side chains occurred in this process. Iodocyclohexane was the most effective demethylation reagent for increasing the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups in the demethylated lignin, which was attributed to the demethylation of lignin, cleavage of the lignin side chains and recondensation reaction.159 In addition, the use of a catalyst is conducive to the demethylation of lignin. For example, under microwave radiation, water-tolerant indium triflate was used as a catalyst to catalyze the demethylation of organosolv lignin in water/sulfolane medium.160 The content of phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin increased from 2.1 to 4.4 mmol g−1. Moreover, indium triflate catalysis required relatively mild reaction conditions and low catalyst loads.160
Compared with the above-mentioned chemical process, the biological demethylation of lignin occurs under mild reaction conditions, and thus the harmful reagents and unwanted degradation of lignin can be avoided.158 In the process of the biological demethylation of lignin, O-demethylases can cleave the O-methyl/methoxyl groups in the structure of lignin.161 The study by Venkatesagowda et al.161 revealed that the demethylation of kraft lignin by wood-rot fungi including Fomitopsis pinicola, Galerina autumnalis, and Aspergillus sp.3 BRI 270 was probably mediated through O-demethylases. Lignin demethylation can also be achieved by a laccase–mediator system.162 For example, kraft lignin was treated with NS51002 laccases and NS51003 laccases for 24 h in combination with three mediators, including 2,2′-azinobis-(3-ethyl-benzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (ABTS), 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (HBT) and 2,2,6,6-tetra-methylpiperidin-1-oxyl (TEMPO). Demethylation of lignin resulted in the split of the methoxy groups of lignin and the formation of methanol. The efficient laccase–mediator systems for the demethylation of lignin were NS51002-ABTS, NS51002-TEMPO and NS51003-HBT. The obtained demethylated lignin was suitable as a substitute for phenol.162
5.4. Graft copolymerization

5.4.1. Ring-opening polymerization. 
The active hydroxyl groups of lignin are good binding sites for ring-opening polymerization (ROP).163 In ROP, the hydroxyl groups of lignin react with cyclic monomers. The cyclic monomer is opened in the presence of an initiator, resulting in a reactive center, which can react with the next cyclic monomer.164,165 By ROP, the solubility of lignin and compatibility between lignin and polymer matrix are enhanced.166 For example, using tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate as a catalyst, β-butyrolactone and/or ε-caprolactone as cyclic monomers were grafted onto alkali lignin via ROP.167 Compared with raw lignin, the obtained lignin copolymers were soluble in common organic solvents such as chloroform and tetrahydrofuran. Moreover, lignin copolymers from lignin and poly(ε-caprolactone) as reinforcement fillers in poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) nanofibers remarkably improved the mechanical properties, biodegradability and biocompatibility of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) nanofibers.167 Similarly, in the presence of tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate catalyst, ε-caprolactone and L-lactide as cyclic monomers were grafted on alkali lignin via solvent-free ROP.163 The resulting lignin copolymers (lignin–poly(ε-caprolactone-co-lactide)) exhibited tunable molecular weights from 10 to 16 kDa, and Tg from −40 °C to 40 °C. These lignin copolymers were miscible with polycaprolactone. In the presence of lignin copolymers as fillers, the mechanical properties of polycaprolactone nanofibers were enhanced.163
In ROP, the type of lignin plays a role in the performance of the lignin copolymer. Lignin copolymers (lignin-g-PCL copolymers) were prepared via the ROP of ε-caprolactone with different types of lignin.168 Compared with raw lignin, the compatibility and dispersion of lignin-g-PCL copolymers in acetone, chloroform, and toluene were enhanced. Lignin with more aliphatic hydroxyl groups was found to be favorable for the ROP reaction. The molecular weights of lignin-g-PCL copolymers were positively correlated with the content of aliphatic hydroxyl groups of lignin. Moreover, compared with poly(ε-caprolactone), lignin-g-PCL copolymers had a lower melting temperature and crystallinity, and the melting temperature and crystallinity changed with the type of lignin.168


5.4.2. Atom transfer radical polymerization. 
Through atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), lignin-based copolymers with a well-designed composition and functionality can be prepared by regulating the molecular weight and length of the graft chains.169,170 In ATRP, lignin is first esterified with 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide to obtain a lignin macroinitiator. Then, in the presence of copper halide/nitrogen-based ligand catalyst, a functional polymer such as poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and poly(methyl methacrylate) is grafted on the lignin macroinitiator, resulting in the production of lignin-based copolymers (Fig. 8).163,169,171 For example, using CuBr/1,1,4,7,10,10-hexamethyltriethylenetetramine ligand catalyst, poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (PEGMA) was grafted on the lignin macroinitiator by ATRP, resulting in lignin–PEGMA copolymers.169 By changing the weight ratio of the PEGMA/lignin macroinitiator, the molecular weights of lignin copolymers ranged from 38.7 to 65.0 kDa. The lignin copolymers had enhanced thermal stability due to the introduction of PEGMA.169 In addition, two lignin macroinitiators were prepared via the complete or partial α-bromoisobutylation of the hydroxyl groups of lignin with 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide.171 Then, lignin copolymers were synthesized by the ATRP of acrylamide and lignin macroinitiators. The lignin macroinitiator was regarded as the core, and different macroinitiators resulted in lignin copolymers with different graft densities and arm lengths. The lignin copolymers were water-soluble over the whole pH range, which was attributed to the introduction of water-soluble acrylamide.171

5.5. The influence of lignin structure/feedstock on functionalization
The chemical composition, structure, and functional group distribution of lignin affect its functionalization. Studies have shown that hydroxymethylation, phenolation, amination, etc. are related to the lignin structure/feedstock. The functionalization is primarily decided by the surface functional groups on the lignin molecules, which vary with the lignin feedstock. In addition, according to the lignin structure/feedstock, the solvents and reaction conditions need to be considered for functionalization.
The purity, solubility in water, and functional groups of lignin and the reaction conditions affect its hydroxymethylation. Sodium lignosulfonate is water-soluble at pH < 11. kraft lignin has a large number of phenolic structures with free sites.172 Organosolv lignin shows the lowest content of ash, sugar and sulfur. When these lignins with different properties were subjected to hydroxymethylation and formaldehyde, for the kraft lignin and organosolv lignin, higher formaldehyde conversions were obtained at pH = 11 due to their high concentration of guaiacyl-type-OH and low content of impurities. After hydroxymethylation, the hydroxymethylated lignin can be used as a part of phenol substitute to produce phenolic resin.172
Lignin from different sources and extraction processes also exhibits different reactivity in the phenolation reaction.148 For pine kraft lignin, a high ratio of lignin/phenol led to high molecular weight of the phenolated lignin and high acid charge led to a low molecular weight of phenolated lignin. Compared with pine kraft lignin, sweetgum biorefinery lignin has a higher molecular weight, and thus a lower ratio of lignin/phenol and higher temperature were studied for sweetgum biorefinery lignin. The optimum phenolation conditions for pine kraft lignin were the ratio of lignin/phenol of 3/5, acid charge of 5%, and temperature of 90 °C. For sweetgum biorefinery lignin, the optimum phenolation conditions were the ratio of lignin/phenol of 2/5, acid charge of 5% and temperature of 110 °C. Specifically, 30 wt% of phenol reacted with pine kraft lignin to form phenolated lignin, while 60 wt% of phenol reacted with sweetgum biorefinery lignin. These two phenolated lignins showed more phenolic hydroxyl groups and free active sites than the unmodified lignin, and they were better substitutes for phenol.148 It was also found that in the amination of lignin, its molecular weight had an effect on the degree of amination.173 Lignins with a high molecular weight and low molecular weight were obtained through the solvent precipitation fractionation of pine kraft lignin. It was found that the lignin with a low molecular weight showed higher amine substitution regardless of the amine reagents and pH. Moreover, amine substitution of pine kraft lignin took place selectively in the ortho position of the non-etherified phenolic hydroxyl groups.173
6. Engineering lignin into energy materials
The increasing demand for electrification, smart grids, electric vehicles, etc. has triggered the development of high-performance, cost-effective and environmentally friendly energy storage materials (Table 3).174 In addition to low-cost and sustainability, lignin possesses biodegradability, which helps to reduce environmental pollution in the production of energy storage materials. The phenolic hydroxyl groups in lignin provide active reaction sites, enabling the storage of ions and presenting good redox activity.4 The high carbon content of lignin gives it potential for the preparation of carbon materials, which have wide applications as energy materials particularly electrode materials.175
Table 3 Lignin-based materials used as electrodes and electrolyte for batteries and supercapacitors




Lignin type
Lignin-based materials
Preparation method
Uses in battery and supercapacitor
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
Porous lignin-derived carbon/carbon nanotube composites
Hydrophobic self-assembly, and carbonization
Anode material for lithium-ion batteries
Reversible specific capacity: 614 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles

179



Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
Hierarchical lignin-derived porous carbon
Gas-exfoliation and in situ templating technology
Anode material for lithium-ion batteries
Volume/mass energy density: 730 mA h cm−3/550 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2 A g−1; cycle performance: ∼99% retention at 1.0 A g−1 after 10000 cycles

183



Lignin (molecular weight = 10000)
Lignin-based mesoporous carbonized nanofibers
Electrospinning technique and thermal treatment
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
Reversible capacity: 384.4 mA h g−1 at 1.0 mA g−1; cycle performance: capacity retention of 89.2% at 1.0 A g−1 after 400 cycles; discharge capacity:127.7 mA h g−1 at 5.0 A g−1

181



Alkali lignin
Lignin-derived water-soluble binder
Free radical graft copolymerization, and alkaline hydrolysis
Micro silicon anode for lithium-ion batteries
Specific capacity: 1914 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 840 mA g−1; initial coulombic efficiency: 91.0%

185



Lignin (molecular weight = 10000)
Biomass-based lignin binder
Dispersing lignin in alkaline water
Cathode for 5 V lithium-ion batteries
Capacity value: 110.8 mA h g−1 at a 1C rate after 1000 cycles; overall coulombic efficiency: 99.5% after 1000 cycles

188



Kraft lignin
Binder and conductive additive
Low-temperature heat treatment
Silicon nanoparticle electrodes for lithium-ion batteries
Initial discharge capacity: up to 3086 mA h g−1 and retaining 2378 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1 A g−1

187



Lignin kraft and lignin sulphonate
Lignin-derived hard carbon
Thermal annealing, washing and thermal treatment procedure
Anode for Na-ion batteries
Reversible capacity: 284 mA h g−1

177



Sodium lignin sulfonate
Hard carbon microspheres
Spray drying process and carbonization
Anode material for sodium-ion batteries
Reversible capacity: 339 mA h g−1; initial coulombic efficiency: 88.3%

178



Alkali lignin
Lignin-derived hard carbon
Low-temperature pre-oxidation
Anode for sodium-ion batteries
Rate capability: 235.6 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1; cycle performance: 288.7 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1after 250 cycles

191



Sodium lignosulfonate
Porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets
Gas-exfoliation and in situ templating
Electrode material for supercapacitor
Specific capacitance: 320 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1; cycling stability: 93.5% retention after 10000 cycles at 5.0 A g−1

193



Lignin form corn stalk refining residue
Lignin-based carbon fibers
Modification and fractionation strategy; electrospun
Electrodes for supercapacitor
Energy storage density: 442.2 F g−1

194



Alcell® lignin
Activated carbon fibers
H3PO4 activation and partial gasification with oxygen during the carbonization step
Self-standing supercapacitor electrodes
Energy density: 8.4 W h kg−1; maximum deliverable power: 47 kW kg−1; capacitance: 85% retention after 5000 cycles at 1.3 V

195



Kraft lignin
Lignin based porous carbon monolith
Dual templates (P123 and silica nanoparticles) and carbonization procedure
Electrodes for supercapacitor
Capacitance: 2.7 F cm−2; specific/volumetric capacitance: 200.2 F g−1/104.5 F cm−3

197



Sodium lignosulfonate
Lignosulfonate/single-walled carbon nanotube
Hydrothermal process
Electrodes for flexible supercapacitor
Specific capacitance: 292 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1; energy density: 17.1 W h kg−1at 324 W kg−1; electrochemical stability: 98% capacitance retention after 1000 bending cycles for 90°

199



Lignosulfonate
Lignosulfonate functionalized graphene hydrogels
One-step hydrothermal process
Electrodes for flexible supercapacitor
Specific capacitance: 408 F g−1 at 1 A g−1; rate capability: 75.4% retention at 20 A g−1; cycling stability: 84.4% retention after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1

200



Lignin derived from the corncob
Hybrid double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel electrolyte
Formation of lignin hydrophobic aggregation
Electrolyte for flexible supercapacitor
Specific capacitance: 190 F g−1; energy density: 15.24 W h kg−1

201



Alkali lignin (molecular weight = 10000)
Lignin hydrogel electrolytes; lignin/PAN nanofiber electrodes
Base-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization and cross-linking electrospinning and self-activation process
Electrolyte and electrodes for flexible supercapacitor
Capacitance: 129.23 F g−1, 95% retention over 10000 cycle; coulombic efficiency: 95.95%; maximum energy/power density: 4.49 W h kg−1/2.63 kW kg−1

206





At present, technical lignin and related model compounds have been engineered into lignin-based carbon materials, lignin-based hydrogels and lignin-based binders for lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. The carbonization method, hydrophobic self-assembly, templating technology, hydrothermal process and electrospinning technique have been developed to prepare lignin-based carbon materials (Table 3). The resulting carbon materials include hard carbon, carbon nanofibers, carbon nanotubes and carbon quasi-nanosheets, which are commonly used as electrode materials. Lignin-based hydrogels are used as electrolytes and electrodes owing to their high ionic conductivity, safety and sustainability (Table 3). Lignin-based binders are prepared as electrode materials. With the assistance of lignin-based carbon materials, lignin-based hydrogels and lignin-based binders, the prepared lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries and supercapacitors show good electrochemical performance such as high initial coulombic efficiency, high specific capacitance, and excellent cycle stability.
6.1. Rechargeable batteries

6.1.1. Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been extensively used in portable electronic devices and electric vehicles owing to their high energy and power density, fast charge capability and long cycle life.176–178 Thanks to its high carbon content, lignin has been used as a carbon precursor to prepare carbon materials (e.g., porous carbon, carbon fiber and activated carbon).179 Moreover, lignin-based carbon materials exhibit high conductivity and excellent mechanical integrity, which are conducive for the highly reversible storage capacity of Li+.4
Graphite, a commercial anode material for LIBs, has a limited theoretical capacity (372 mA h g−1), long diffusion pathways of Li+ and slow charge/discharge rate.180–182 Lignin-based carbon nanofibers with a large surface area and high electrical conductivity can be used as a substitute for graphite in LIBs. For example, lignin-based carbon nanofibers were prepared by electrospinning and thermal treatment with lignin and polyacrylonitrile as carbon precursors and triblock copolymer Pluronic P123 as a template.181 Lignin-based carbon nanofibers exhibited a mesoporous structure with a pore size of about 10 nm, which could provide fast transport channels and reduce the diffusion pathways for Li+. Their turbostratic graphitic microstructures also contributed to the storage and transport of Li+. Compared with lignin-based carbon nanofibers without a template, the template led to the fusion between adjacent carbon nanofibers, which was beneficial for electron transportation because of providing short and continuous pathways. When these lignin-based carbon nanofibers were directly used as anodes in LIBs, they exhibited excellent mechanical strength, high reversible capacity (384.4 mA h g−1), high discharge capacity (127.7 mA h g−1) and outstanding cycle performances.181
To improve the electrochemical performance of lignin-based carbon nanofibers, some metal oxides with high theoretical capacities have been used to functionalize lignin-based carbon nanofibers. Lignin-derived carbon nanofiber substrates were fabricated via electrospinning, stabilization and carbonization, and then functionalized with Fe2O3 nanoparticles, resulting in flexible lignin-derived carbon nanofiber substrates/Fe2O3 electrodes.182 The Fe2O3 nanoparticles were uniformly distributed on the surface of the lignin-derived carbon nanofiber substrates, facilitating the fast and reversible conversion of Fe2O3 with Li. The small size of the Fe2O3 nanoparticles and large specific surface area of the lignin-derived carbon nanofiber substrates were beneficial for accommodating the volume change during the lithiation/delithiation processes. The discharge specific capacity of the electrodes retained ∼715 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles.182
Lignin-based porous carbon (LPC) materials have been applied in LIBs owing to their high specific surface areas and high graphitization degree.103,183 They are usually prepared via carbonization and chemical activation. However, chemical activators such as KOH, NaOH and H2SO4 are very corrosive and unrecyclable.184 Moreover, the LPC from the chemical activator had a microporous structure, resulting in high irreversible capacity, low initial coulombic efficiency and low volume/mass specific capacity.179,183 Accordingly, using a the non-corrosive and recyclable ZnCO3 as an activator, hierarchical lignin-derived porous carbon (HLPC) was prepared via gas-exfoliation and in situ templating technology.183 The CO2 produced by ZnCO3 decomposition and lignin pyrolysis had a gas-exfoliation effect on lignin particles, which could prevent the structure of lignin from shrinking due to pyrolysis dehydration and help to form micropores and macropores. In addition, the ZnO particles from the decomposition of ZnCO3 can be used as in situ templates to form uniform mesopores. After acid etching, HLPC was prepared (Fig. 10a).183 The HLPC with a multistage pore distribution could shorten the transfer path for Li+ and electrons, provide abundant active sites for Li+ storage and reduce irreversible capacity (Fig. 10b).179,183 The HLPC anode exhibited a high reversible volume specific capacity and excellent cycle performance.183
 Fig. 10  Preparation of hierarchical lignin-derived porous carbon (HLPC) and the lithium storage mechanism. (a) Schematic diagram of HLPC preparation. (b) Lithium storage mechanism of HLPC. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
In addition to the above-mentioned gas-exfoliation and template technology, which can regulate the pore structure, porous lignin-derived carbon (PLC)/carbon nanotube composites were prepared via hydrophobic self-assembly between lignin and carbon nanotubes and carbonization.179 Besides as a carbon source, lignin was used as a dispersant to prevent the aggregation of carbon nanotubes. Furthermore, the microstructure deformation and collapse of PLC during the charge and discharge process may be solved. The intervention of carbon nanotubes can improve the microstructure of PLC, providing transport channels and active sites for Li+ storage. The composites as LIB anodes presented a higher initial coulombic efficiency and reversible specific capacity than PLC and carbon nanotubes.179
Binders, which are typically composed of electrochemically inactive polymers, are an important component in LIBs. The binder is used to facilitate the formation of the electrode and maintain its structural stability and cycle stability.185,186 Conventionally, the binder for electrodes in commercial LIBs is polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). Nevertheless, PVDF can easily deteriorate the cycle life of batteries by forming LiF and double bonds (CCF−).4 Recently, lignin-based binders have been developed as an alternative to conventional fluorinated binders. For example, using lignin as both a binder and conductive additive, a silicon–lignin composite electrode for LIBs was prepared via the slurry mixing and coating method and heat treatment.187 Silicon nanoparticles were interconnected in the 3D matrix provided by lignin and encapsulated by carbon from the heat-treated lignin. The composite electrode exhibited a good electrochemical performance, where its initial discharge capacity was up to 3086 mA h g−1 and it remained at 2378 mA h g−1 even after 100 cycles.187
A lignin-derived water-soluble binder for the micro silicon anode of LIBs was prepared via free radical graft copolymerization between lignin and sodium polyacrylate and alkaline hydrolysis.185 The binder showed a nonlinear molecular structure, which could accommodate the large volume change in the silicon anode upon Li insertion. Compared with the electrode with carboxymethyl cellulose binder, the electrode with lignin-derived water-soluble binder retained a higher capacity (1914 mA h g−1) after 100 cycles.185 In addition, Ma et al.188 reported that lignin with many phenolic groups can be used to prepare a free radical scavenger binder for 5 V LIBs. The binder could inhibit free radical-induced electrolyte decomposition and protect the cathode/electrolyte interface. Moreover, the lignin-based binder allowed water to act as a solvent during the fabrication of the electrodes. The electrode with lignin-based binder retained a capacity of 94.1% even after 1000 cycles, which was better than that of the PVDF electrode.188


6.1.2. Sodium-ion batteries. 
Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have an advantage over LIBs considering the abundance of available resources.176,189–191 Hard carbon is composed of randomly distributed curved graphite layers. It possesses a disordered structure, micropores and large interlayer spacing, and thus has been studied as an anode material for SIBs.189,190 However, hard carbon obtained from the direct carbonization of lignin cannot provide good electrochemical performances.191 Accordingly, the low-temperature pre-oxidation of lignin was performed to introduce carbonyl groups for modifying its cross-linking structure. The growth and orientation of the graphite layers during the carbonization process were inhibited. The increased layer distance facilitated the insertion of Na+. The hard carbon showed a good rate capability and cycle stability.191
In addition, the type of lignin as the precursor and synthesis methods (e.g., temperature and processing conditions) have an effect on the performance of hard carbon.191,192 For example, two hard carbon anodes were prepared using lignin kraft and lignin sulphonate precursors.177 The hard carbon made from kraft lignin showed dense particles with a random shape and had a specific surface area of 1.8 m2 g−1. The hard carbon made from kraft lignin presented a stable capacity of 181 mA h g−1 during cycling. The hard carbon made from lignin sulphonate showed spherical particles with macropores and had a surface area of 180 m2 g−1. The hard carbon made from lignin sulphonate exhibited a capacity of 205 mA h g−1; however, the capacity faded after 30 cycles. Therefore, additional water washing and thermal treatment for lignin sulphonate were employed to reduce the impurities and surface area of the hard carbon made from lignin sulphonate, resulting in a high and stable capacity.177
To enhance the initial coulombic efficiency of hard carbon, strictly controlling its specific surface area and enlarging its interlayer distance is essential.189 A hard carbon microsphere (HCM) was fabricated from sodium lignin sulfonate via a spray drying process and a subsequent carbonization.178 Sodium lignin sulfonate was well-dispersed in the small spherical droplets during spray drying. Moreover, its high content of hydrophobic benzyl alcohol groups could self-assemble into the core of micelles, resulting in a compact structure after drying. This compact structure of HCM led to a low specific surface area (11.89 m2 g−1) and low surface defects. The HCM showed a high reversible capacity (339 mA h g−1) and high initial coulombic efficiency (88.3%). Furthermore, the enlarged interlayer distance of HCM promoted the reversible reaction during the cycle.178
A carbonization strategy was developed to enhance the low initial coulombic efficiency of hard carbon. Hard carbon was prepared as anodes for SIBs by carbonizing the interpenetrating polymer networks made from lignin and epoxy resin.189 In this process, lignin could cure epoxy resin and form interpenetrating polymer networks. By adjusting the mass ratios of epoxy resin/lignin and carbonization temperature, the interlayer distance of hard carbon and defect sites for Na+ storage changed. With an increase in the mass ratio of epoxy resin/lignin, the interlayer distance of hard carbon decreased. A low carbonization temperature resulted in a low capacity. Under the optimal conditions, that is, the mass ratio of epoxy resin/lignin of 5/5 and carbonization temperature of 1400 °C, the obtained hard carbon showed a high capacity (316 mA h g−1), high initial coulombic efficiency (82%), and good cycle stability.189

6.2. Supercapacitors

6.2.1. Lignin-based electrode. 
Supercapacitors as energy storage devices have attracted growing attention due to their high power density, fast charge–discharge rate and long cycle stability.193,194 The energy storage of supercapacitors is primarily based on the electrostatic adsorption between ions and electrode–electrolyte interface or faradaic redox reactions.4,195,196 The performance of supercapacitors is closely related to their electrode materials. The outstanding electrode materials should have a large specific surface area, suitable pore size for facilitating ion diffusion, superior electrical conductivity for efficient charge transport, and excellent physicochemical stability.174,197
Converting lignin into carbon materials may be a way to address the high production cost, environmental concerns and unsatisfactory electrochemical performance of porous carbon electrode materials.193,195 Porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets were prepared via gas-exfoliation and in situ templating as an electrode for high-performance supercapacitors.193 Owing to its good solubility in water and dispersion performance, sodium lignosulfonate was used as the carbon precursor. The lignosulfonate/ZnC2O4 composite was firstly self-assembled through amphiphilic lignosulfonate using ethanol/water solvent to form a lamellar structure. During the carbonization process, the CO and CO2 released by ZnC2O4 gradually exfoliated the lamellar composite, destroying the compact lignin skeleton. The ZnO particles generated from ZnC2O4 were used as an in situ template to produce hierarchical pores (Fig. 11). The porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets had a large specific surface area and rational pore distribution, which provided quick channels for the diffusion of electrolyte ions and sufficient active sites for charge storage. The symmetric supercapacitor assembled with the porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets showed a high specific capacitance (274 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) and high specific energy density (9.75 W h kg−1 at 6157.9 W kg−1).193
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram showing the synthesis of porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets (PLC). LS: sodium lignosulfonate; LS/ZnC2O4: lignosulfonate/zinc oxalate composites. Reprinted from ref. 193, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. 
Adjusting the pore structure and increasing the specific surface area of porous carbons are the common strategies for improving their electrochemical performance for application in supercapacitors. The macropores can be used as ion-buffering reservoirs.174 The mesopores help to shorten the ion transfer paths.193 The micropores can provide efficient active sites for charge storage.174 A template-free approach was used to prepare 3D hierarchical porous carbon from enzymatic hydrolysis lignin.174 Hierarchical porous carbons were obtained via hydrothermal carbonization in H2SO4 and KOH activation. The porous carbon exhibited a 3D hierarchical structure with abundant macropores and interconnected micropores and mesopores, which was attributed to the hydrothermal carbonization and activation. The porous carbon had a high specific surface area (1290–1660 m2 g−1) and high electrical conductivity (4.0–5.4 S cm−1). For comparison, a contrast carbon was prepared by the direct KOH activation of lignin. The contrast carbon exhibited an irregular structure, low specific surface area and poor electrochemical performance. The symmetric supercapacitor assembled with the 3D porous carbon electrode presented a high energy density (46.8 W h kg−1) and retained an energy density of 22.9 W h kg−1 at a power density of 25400 W kg−1 in ionic liquid electrolyte.174
Carbon fibers (CFs) are gaining increasing attention for supercapacitor applications. Polyacrylonitrile, owing to its excellent spinnability and high carbon yield in electrospinning, is the common precursor for producing CFs.194,195,198 Considering the high-cost and unsustainability of polyacrylonitrile, lignin-based CFs were used as substitutes.194,195 The preparation of lignin-based CFs usually involves the preparation of electrospun lignin nanofibers, followed by oxidation treatment, and carbonization at high temperature. In this method, the main disadvantages are the long air stabilization time before carbonization and low preparation yield of CFs. By adding H3PO4 to the lignin solution and regulating the oxygen activation partial pressure during carbonization, lignin-based CFs with a surface area of up to 2340 m2 g−1 were prepared.195 The addition of H3PO4 enhanced the porosity development and preparation yield of CFs and reduced the stabilization time. Wide micropores and electroactive functional groups were produced by adjusting the oxygen activation partial pressure. Under the optimal conditions, that is, mass ratio of H3PO4:lignin of 0.1 and oxygen partial pressure of 3.5%, the lignin-based CFs showed an energy density of 8.4 W h kg−1 and maximum deliverable power of 47 kW kg−1. Even after 5000 cycles, the lignin-based CFs retained 85% capacitance. When the lignin-based CFs were used as self-standing electrodes for a supercapacitor, the energy storage of the supercapacitor increased by 50% because of oxygen activation.195
Lignin has heterogeneous structure, large polydispersity index, and low molecular weight, which limit its large-scale application in supercapacitors. Modified lignin with a high molecular weight and low heterogeneity was prepared by modification and fractionation.194 Through the modification reaction between the hydroxyl groups of lignin and isophorone diisocyanate, the molecular weight of lignin increased, and the hydrogen-bonding interaction among the lignin molecules was reduced. Then, the modified lignin was purified by a fractionation process based on dialysis tubes with different sizes. The modified lignin was used as a carbon precursor, which was advantageous for reducing the carbon weight loss in the precursor fibers, forming a hierarchical porous structure and improving the specific surface area. The lignin-based CFs with a specific surface area of 2042.86 m2 g−1 and hierarchical porous structure were used as electrodes for supercapacitors, resulting a good electrochemical performance.194
Recently, flexible supercapacitors have shown potential applications in flexible/wearable electronics because of their high power density, long cycle life, and unconventional mechanical properties under different compressive, bending and folding conditions.196,199 At present, carbon materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes have been developed as electrodes.199,200 To increase the pseudocapacitive performance of electrode materials, pseudocapacitive additives such as metal oxides and organic compounds are employed.200 Lignin possesses phenol groups, which can induce a reversible redox reaction. Introducing lignin into the conductive electrodes will enhance charge-storage capacity and reduce the cost.199,200 For example, lignosulfonate-functionalized graphene hydrogels were prepared via a one-step hydrothermal process. Then, using H2SO4–PVA gel as an electrolyte, the lignosulfonate-functionalized graphene hydrogels as electrodes were further fabricated into a flexible solid-state supercapacitor (Fig. 12a).200 The flexible supercapacitor exhibited good mechanical flexibility (Fig. 12b). Under a pressure of 0.2 MPa, the lignosulfonate-functionalized graphene hydrogels maintained their 3D interconnected porous structure (Fig. 12c and d). Due to the pseudocapacitive effect of the redox-active lignin, the flexible supercapacitor showed a high specific capacitance of 408 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and high capacitance retention of 84.0% over 10000 cycles.200
 Fig. 12  Preparation, photograph and SEM images of flexible solid-state supercapacitor made from lignosulfonate-functionalized graphene hydrogel (LS-GH). (a) Schematic process of fabricating flexible supercapacitor. (b) Photograph of flexible supercapacitor. SEM image of the interior microstructure of LS-GH after applying pressure of 0.2 MPa at low magnification (c) and at high magnification (d). Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
To improve the charge storage capacity of lignin-based electrodes, it is feasible to prepare composite electrodes by combining lignin and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). SWCNTs can serve as a pressure-sensitive and conducting component in lignin-based electrodes. For example, a flexible solid-state supercapacitor was prepared by using a pressure-sensitive lignosulfonate/SWCNT hydrogel as the electrode and biocompatible cellulose/Li2SO4 gel as the electrolyte.199 A lignosulfonate/SWCNT hydrogel and cellulose/Li2SO4 gel were prepared via a hydrothermal process and phase-inversion method, respectively. The lignosulfonate/SWCNT hydrogel showed a 3D network structure due to the hydrogen bonds and π–π stacking interactions between the lignosulfonate and SWCNTs. The symmetric supercapacitor presented a high specific capacitance (292 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) and outstanding energy density (17.1 W h kg−1 at 324 W kg−1). Even after 1000 bending cycles, it had a capacitance retention of 98%.199


6.2.2. Lignin-based electrolyte. 
Hydrogel electrolytes are essential for the fabrication of flexible supercapacitors, which can avoid the leakage risk of liquid electrolytes and possess a higher ionic conductivity than most solid polymer electrolytes.201–204 The commonly used hydrogel electrolytes are polyvinyl alcohol-based gels such as PVA/H2SO4 and PVA/KOH.199 However, they are derived from fossil resources and hardly degradable. Furthermore, some hydrogel electrolytes suffer from poor mechanical strength.199,201,205 Currently, lignin is used as an additive to copolymerize with traditional polymers or modified lignin as a precursor for the production of lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes.201,206 The addition of lignin to the electrolyte can improve the capacitance of supercapacitors through faradaic reaction and enhance their mechanical strength.4
Some lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes have limited mechanical strength such as strength and toughness, and thus cannot meet the requirements of flexible supercapacitors. Lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes were prepared via base-catalyzed ROP and chemical cross-linking.206 Lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes showed cross-linked networks and high ionic conductivity and mechanical integrity. Using lignin-based hydrogel electrolytes and electrospun lignin/polyacrylonitrile nanofiber electrodes, lignin-based flexible supercapacitors were prepared. The supercapacitors showed good flexibility and durability, high capacitance of 129.23 F g−1, and high capacitance retention of 95% after 10000 cycles.206
Based on the different solubilities of lignin in alkaline and acid solution and the hybrid chemical–physical double-crosslinked method, a chemical crosslinked lignin hydrogel was first prepared via base-catalyzed ROP and chemical cross-linking. Then, a hybrid double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel electrolyte was prepared via the H2SO4 treatment of the chemical crosslinked lignin hydrogel.201 H2SO4 induced the physical hydrophobic aggregation of lignin. The hybrid lignin hydrogel electrolyte exhibited high compressive stress upon fracture, good shape recovery property and high ionic conductivity. The flexible supercapacitor was constructed using hybrid double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel as the electrolyte and polyaniline deposited carbon cloth as the electrode, showing a high specific capacitance (190 F g−1) and high energy density (15.24 W h kg−1). Moreover, the supercapacitor retained a high specific capacitance after 500 cycles of bending or compression.201
In the past decade, great progress has been achieved in the application of lignin-based materials for energy storage. However, there are still some challenges and obstacles for their large-scale application. Firstly, lignin-based carbon materials have been employed for energy storage. To achieve high storage capacity and high coulombic efficiency, suitable pretreatment methods and carbonization conditions should be developed to improve their pore structure and specific surface area. Furthermore, lignin-based novel carbon materials with additional pseudocapacitance can be studied by introducing some heteroatoms in them. Secondly, the relationship between different lignin raw materials and the properties of the prepared energy materials should be studied. Thirdly, the research on the energy storage mechanisms of lignin-based energy materials needs to be deepened to adjust the required raw materials and processing conditions for specific applications.

7. Lignin-based adsorbents and catalysts
7.1. Lignin-based adsorbents
The hydroxyl groups, carboxyl groups and methoxy groups of lignin can be used as active adsorption sites for the removal cationic dyes and heavy metal ions.207 Adsorption between lignin-based adsorbents and pollutants was achieved through ion exchange, surface adsorption or complexation.42 Lignin-based hydrogels and lignin-based carbon materials are the two main types of lignin-based adsorbents.

7.1.1. Absorption of organic dyes. 
Compared with membrane separation, coagulation/flocculation, electrochemical degradation and photocatalytic degradation, adsorption is a simple and effective method to remove organic dyes from wastewater.208–210 The adsorption occurs primarily via π–π interaction, hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interaction between organic dyes and lignin-based adsorbents.145,211
The lignin or modified lignin hydrogel possessed good adsorption properties and could remove organic dyes in aqueous medium. To overcome the problems such as poor swelling and mechanical properties, and harsh preparation reactions of hydrogels, a series of lignin–PVA hydrogels was prepared using different lignins (alkali lignin, kraft lignin and enzymatic hydrolysis lignin) as raw materials, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as the framework template and epichlorohydrin as the cross-linker.207 Lignin showed good compatibility with PVA. The introduction of lignin enhanced the swelling ratio of the lignin–PVA hydrogels. Due to the lower molecular weight and higher content of phenolic hydroxyl groups, the alkali lignin and kraft lignin showed a higher yield of lignin–PVA hydrogel when the concentration of lignin was 5%. Compared with the PVA hydrogel, the introduction of lignin enhanced the adsorption capacity for cationic dye. The saturated adsorption capacity of the lignin–PVA hydrogels for rhodamine 6G was higher than 125 mg g−1. The adsorption capacity was related to the large negative charges on the lignin–PVA hydrogel and π–π hydrophobic interaction between the lignin and cationic dye.207 In addition, lignin-based hydrogels with a high swelling and high dye removal efficiency were prepared by cross-linking different lignins (wheat straw organosolv lignin, wheat straw soda lignin and softwood kraft lignin) with poly(methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic acid).212 The lignin-based hydrogels had a porous structure including large and small pores. The chemical structure of lignin affected the swelling capacity of the lignin-based hydrogels. Using lignin with a higher content of aliphatic hydroxyl groups, the lignin-based hydrogels had a higher degree of cross-linking, resulting in lower swelling. Furthermore, the lignin-based hydrogels presented had a high negative charge due to in the presence of a large number of carboxylic groups and exhibited a high water absorption capacity. The hydrogel prepared from wheat straw soda lignin in NH4OH solution was the best adsorbent with methylene blue removal capacity of 81.5% and storage modulus of 2880 Pa.212
Lignin sulfonation is conducive for electrostatic interactions and π–π stacking interactions between lignin and cationic dyes by increasing the content of sulfonate groups and changing the conformation of lignin.145 For example, sulfonate lignin-based hydrogels were prepared by cross-linking sulfomethylated lignin with epichlorohydrin.145 The sulfonate lignin-based hydrogels had a rough and porous surface, and their pores were smaller and more compact with an increase in the sulfonation degree. With an increase in pH, the sulfonate groups, carboxyl groups and phenolic hydroxyl groups of the sulfonate lignin-based hydrogels were deprotonated, and the surface of sulfonate lignin-based hydrogels was negatively charged, resulting in enhanced electrostatic attraction and π–π stacking interactions between the hydrogels and methylene blue. Compared with the unmodified kraft lignin, the adsorption capacity of the sulfonate lignin-based hydrogels for methylene blue increased fivefold. The methylene blue adsorption was mainly spontaneous monolayer physisorption.145
In recent years, lignin-based activated carbon and carbon fiber have been also studied for dye adsorption. Lignin-based activated carbon is typically prepared via carbonization and physical or chemical activation. Proper physical or chemical activation can enlarge its specific surface area and increase its porosity, thereby improving the adsorption efficiency of organic dyes. The chemical activation of lignin-based carbon by activation agents such as KOH, H3PO4 and ZnCl2 can increase its porosity.213 The activation agent plays a role in removing O and H from the lignin precursor in the form of water, resulting in the formation of porosity.20 For example, using low sulfur acid hydrotropic lignin as the carbon precursor and H3PO4 as the activation agent, lignin-based activated carbon was prepared by carbonizing a mixture of lignin and H3PO4. The lignin-based activated carbon exhibited a large surface area of over 2000 m2 g−1 and excellent adsorption capacity for Congo red and methylene blue.213
Besides chemical activation, the freeze-drying process is used to prepare lignin-based activated carbon with a porous structure and high specific surface area. Lignin-derived carbon nanosheets were prepared as a rhodamine dye adsorbent via the freeze-drying of lignin and high-temperature carbonization.214 By lowering the freezing temperature and concentration of lignin aqueous solution, lignin-derived carbon nanosheets with a more porous morphology and higher specific surface area were obtained. The lignin-derived carbon nanosheet showed good adsorption capacity for rhodamine dye.214 To enhance the adsorption capacity, selectivity, and regeneration capacity of adsorbents, lignin-derived sulfonated porous carbon was prepared via an etching–sulfonation process with Fe3O4 as a templating agent.210 After etching–sulfonation, the lignin-derived sulfonated porous carbon had large specific surface area and porous structure. Because of the electrostatic interaction between the cationic dye and densely negatively-charged groups such as sulfonate groups, carboxyl groups and phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin, the lignin-derived sulfonated porous carbon showed high selectivity for cationic dyes. At pH 11.0, the lignin-derived sulfonated porous carbon showed the maximum adsorption capacity of 621.52 mg g−1 for methylene blue. Furthermore, the adsorbent could be easily regenerated by treatment in acidic methanol solution. After six cycles, the adsorbent retained its porous structure and adsorption capacity.210


7.1.2. Absorption for inorganic ions. 
Many technologies, including chemical precipitation, membrane separation and ion exchange have been developed to treat heavy metal ions.215,216 However, their high-cost, low removal efficiency and secondary pollution restricts their large-scale application.215,217 Lignin shows potential for the removal of heavy metal ions because of its three-dimensional structure and abundant oxygen-containing functional groups such as methoxyl groups and hydroxyl groups.218,219
Lignin microspheres appear to be effective adsorbents because of their large surface area, good diffusion and mass transfer. In addition, owing to the strong binding tendency between the basic amine groups and acidic metal ions, amino-functionalized lignin microspheres were synthesized through the inverse suspension copolymerization of kraft lignin with poly(ethylene imine), epoxy chloropropane and 5 wt% sodium alginate emulsifier.219 Poly(ethylene imine) and epoxy chloropropane were used as a grafting agent and cross-linker, respectively. The amino-functionalized lignin microspheres had a highly porous structure, surface area of 7.68 m2 g−1 and terminal amino groups of 7.7 mmol g−1. The amino-functionalized lignin microspheres showed good adsorption capacity for Cd2+, Cr(VI), As(V) and Ni2+, and the maximum adsorption capacity was 74.84 mg g−1, 54.20 mg g−1, 53.12 mg g−1 and 49.42 mg g−1, respectively. The adsorption of heavy metal ions by amino-functionalized lignin microspheres was mainly through the complexation between the nitrogen atoms of amino-functionalized lignin microspheres and heavy metal ions and electrostatic interactions between the oxygen atoms of the amino-functionalized lignin microspheres and heavy metal ions (Fig. 13).219
 Fig. 13  Possible adsorption mechanism of amino-functionalized lignin microsphere for Ni2+, Cd2+, Cr(VI), and As(V). Reprinted from ref. 219, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. 
The chemical modification of lignin can tailor its structure, morphology and adsorption capacity.220 A lignin-based adsorbent was prepared via chemical modification. Phenolation treatment improved the reactivity of lignin. Then, amine groups and sulfonate groups were successfully introduced in the phenolated lignin through Mannich reaction and sulfomethylation reaction, respectively.217 The maximum adsorption capacity of the lignin-based adsorbent for Pb(II) was 130.2 mg g−1 and the removal efficiency was 100%. The adsorption of Pb(II) by the lignin-based adsorbent was mainly through chemical adsorption, such as ion exchange and electrostatic attraction. Moreover, this adsorbent could be reused, and its removal efficiency was maintained at over 85% after 5 cycles.217 In addition, by doping Cu2+ in the aminated lignin produced by the reaction of lignin with triethylenetetramine, a Cu/N-doped lignin adsorbent was synthesized.221 After doping with N and Cu2+, the particle size of the adsorbent became smaller and its surface became rough and layered. The adsorption capacity for As(V) by the Cu/N co-doped lignin adsorbent was 253.5 mg g−1 and its removal rate was 86.44%, which was attributed to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the N on the lignin surface and –OH groups in HAsO42−, and the affinity between Cu2+ of the Cu/N-doped lignin adsorbent and O atoms in the oxygen anions. After five cycles, the Cu/N-doped lignin adsorbent showed a high adsorption capacity of 196.0 mg g−1 for As(V).221

7.2. Lignin-based catalysts
Lignin has the potential to prepare novel eco-friendly catalyst. On one hand, lignin is a high-quality carbon source, which can be used to produce carbon materials with a high specific surface area as catalysts. On the other hand, lignin is rich in oxygen-containing functional groups, which can be functionalized. Given their environmental friendliness, reusability and efficiency, lignin-based catalysts are promising for the valorization of lignin.

7.2.1. Lignin-based solid acid catalysts. 
Robust environmental regulations are pushing the development of solid acid catalysts with low-cost, environmental safety, and high efficiency. In contrast to homogeneous acid catalysts, lignin-based solid acids catalysts have gained considerable attention owing to their high catalytic activity, low equipment corrosion and toxicity, and recyclability.222,223 Lignin-based solid acid catalysts can be prepared via chemical activation, carbonization and sulfonation.223
The traditional production of biodiesel has the drawbacks of equipment corrosion, difficult separation and high cost when homogeneous acid catalysts such as concentrated H2SO4 and HCl are used. Sulfonated lignin-derived acid catalysts with sulfonate groups, carboxyl groups and hydroxyl groups on their surface, appear to be green, efficient and recyclable catalysts for the production of biodiesel.223,224 By H3PO4 activation, partial carbonization, and concentrated H2SO4 sulfonation, a sulfonated lignin-derived acid catalyst was prepared using alkali lignin from olive cake.224 H3PO4 activation increased the surface area of the lignin. After sulfonation, the surface of the porous char was occupied by sulfonate groups, resulting in a reduction in surface area. In the presence of the sulfonated lignin-derived acid catalyst, the yield of biodiesel reached 57%. In addition, the catalytic activity of the sulfonated lignin-derived acid catalyst decreased by 16% after 10 cycles, which was mainly attributed to the leaching of the sulfonate groups.224 Traditional carbon-based solid acids have low porosity and surface area, which is not conducive to catalytic reactions. Using lignin as a carbon precursor, microporous lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid catalysts can be prepared via ZnCl2 activation and concentrated H2SO4 sulfonation of lignin.223 Owing to the fact that the ZnCl2 activation lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid catalysts had a high specific surface area and highly porous structure, they provided many active sites for the production of biodiesel. The sulfonation process resulted in pore collapse and decrease in the specific surface area of the lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid catalysts. In the transesterification reaction of oleic acid with methanol for the production of biodiesel, the lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid catalysts showed high catalytic activity with an oleic acid conversion of 92.3%, which remained at 72.9% after five cycles.223
In the catalytic hydrolysis of cellulose, liquid acid is used to accelerate the disintegration of cellulose by the cleavage of β-1,4-glycosidic bonds. There are some problems such as acid recovery, the treatment of acidic hydrolysate and complex separation process.222,225 Zhu et al.222 provided a lignin-based solid acid for the catalytic hydrolysis of cellulose, resulting in the formation of cellulose nanofibers and platform chemicals such as glucose and formic acid. A lignin-based solid acid catalyst was synthesized via the carbonization–sulfonation method, which had –SO3H, –COOH, and phenolic–OH groups. The content of –SO3H groups and total acidic density of the lignin-based solid acid catalyst were 0.60 mmol g−1 and 4.62 mmol g−1, respectively, which were comparable to that of some common carbon-based solid acid catalysts. In the catalytic hydrolysis of cellulose, the adsorption of cellulose on lignin-based solid acid catalysts is dominated by CH–π hydrogen bonds. Then –OH, –COOH and –SO3H groups in lignin-based solid acid catalysts have a synergistic effect on the cleavage of the β-1,4-glycosidic bonds of cellulose.222,226 After five consecutive cycles, the yield of cellulose nanofibers, glucose and formic acid reached 90.8%, 3.9% and 2.1%, respectively.222
Lignin-derived mesoporous carbon solid acids were developed as a catalyst for the hydrolysis of cellulose, which were prepared via evaporation-induced self-assembly or salt-induced self-assembly, followed by carbonization and sulfonation.225 In evaporation-induced self-assembly, the self-assembly of the carbon precursor and soft template Pluronic F127 was induced by the slow evaporation of ethanol at room temperature. In salt-induced self-assembly, self-assembly was achieved via pH control and salt-induced phase separation in the aqueous solution. The lignin-derived mesoporous carbon solid acids had a binding domain (efficiently absorb cellulose) and a catalytic domain (hydrolysis). Compared with the lignin-derived mesoporous carbon solid acid produced from evaporation-induced self-assembly, the lignin-derived mesoporous carbon solid acid produced from salt-induced self-assembly had a larger specific surface area, larger mesopore volume and higher density of –SO3H groups, leading to better catalytic activity for the hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose to glucose. In addition, the lignin-derived mesoporous carbon solid acid showed excellent recyclability and regenerability.225


7.2.2. Lignin-based carbon-supported metal catalysts. 
Owing to their high specific surface area, high stability and abundant functional groups, lignin-based carbon materials are good catalyst supports.227,228 Their functional groups play a role in capturing metal particles and inhibiting their leaching.226 For example, lignin-based activated carbon-supported iron catalysts were prepared for catalyzing the dehydration of xylose to furfural. Firstly, an activated carbon support was prepared from the hydrolysis of lignin by chemical activation with ZnCl2 or physical activation using steam. Then, the supports were modified with different metal precursors (FeCl3·6H2O or Fe(NO3)3·9H2O).227 The lignin-based activated carbon-supported iron catalyst from chemical activation had a higher surface area and pore volume than the that from physical activation, and the catalyst from physical activation had better furfural selectivity. In the presence of the lignin-based activated carbon-supported iron catalyst containing 4 wt% iron from steam activation and FeCl3 precursor, the xylose conversion of 92%, furfural yield of 57% and furfural selectivity of 65% were obtained. The hydroxyl groups of the lignin-based activated carbon-supported iron catalyst increased its Brønsted acid sites, resulting in good catalytic activity. In addition, iron existed in the form of iron oxide, which may play a role in promoting the conversion of xylose.227
In addition, lignin-based activated carbon-supported metal oxide catalysts were prepared via the modification of an activated carbon support with KNO3 treatment and Sn, Al, and Cr chlorides.228 The activated carbon support was prepared via the hydrolysis lignin by chemical activation with ZnCl2 or physical activation using steam. In the catalytic conversion of glucose to lactic acid, the lignin-based activated carbon-supported metal oxide catalysts showed a high conversion of glucose (>94%). Owing to the formation of by-product, the introduction of chromium oxide produced lower yields of lactic acid than tin oxide and aluminum oxide. In the presence of the lignin-based activated carbon-supported metal oxide catalyst with Sn/Al (5/2.5 wt%) from steam-activated and nitric acid treatment, the highest yield of lactic acid (42%) was obtained. KNO3 treatment increased the content of total acidic groups such as carboxyl and phenolic groups, resulting in a positive effect on the yield of lactic acid. In addition, the yield of lactic acid of this catalyst decreased within four cycles, which may be attributed to the deposition of carbonaceous by-products on the active sites and the leaching of aluminum oxides.228
Lignin-based carbon nanofibers have high surface area and possess a pore structure, which help to improve the metal dispersion and reduce aggregation and sintering.229,230 Du et al.230 prepared an Ni/lignin-based carbon nanofiber catalyst for the catalytic hydrogenolysis of lignin by embedding Ni nanoparticles in lignin-based carbon nanofibers, which helped to avoid Ni nanoparticle aggregation, sintering and loss. In the catalytic hydrogenolysis of lignin, the Ni/lignin-based carbon nanofiber catalyst showed good catalytic performance with a conversion of 91% for lignin, a yield of 7% for phenols and a yield of 87% for light lignin fragments. In addition, with an increase in the Ni loading from 1 to 10 wt%, the yield of phenols increased and the average molecular weight of the light lignin fragments decreased. The Ni/lignin-based carbon nanofiber catalyst with an Ni loading of 10 wt% had the highest activity for the hydrogenolysis of aryl ethers. Moreover, the catalyst had reusability and could maintain its catalytic activity for over three cycles without significant loss in the yield of phenols.230
Due to their large specific surface area and abundant oxygen-containing groups, lignin-based carbon dots can be used as supports to help improve the dispersion and stability of metal catalysts. Lignin-based carbon dots can be prepared by etching the lignin carbonization products with a mixture of H2SO4 and HNO3.231 Pt catalysts supported on lignin-based carbon dots for the electro-oxidation of methanol were prepared via the reduction of H2PtCl6 in a lignin-based carbon dot solution. Compared with commercial Pt/C and PtRu/C, the Pt catalysts supported on lignin-based carbon dots obtained by carbonization at 800 °C had better electro-catalytic activity. This is because the lignin-based carbon dots with large specific surface area and many oxygen-containing groups such as hydroxyl and carbonyl groups helped to avoid the aggregation of the Pt catalysts in the reduction process and improved the stability of the Pt catalysts.231

8. Lignin for adhesives
8.1. Lignin-based phenolic resin adhesives
Phenolic resin adhesives are mainly synthesized with phenol and formaldehyde and are used in plywood, oriented strand board, and other engineered wood products.232 They have high bonding strength, thermal stability, and moisture resistance.233–237 However, the high toxicity and easy glue penetration of phenolic resin adhesives cannot be ignored.236 Lignin contains many phenolic hydroxyl groups, showing potential as a phenol substitute for the green and sustainable production of phenolic resin adhesives.237
In general, the suitable structure of lignin for the preparation of phenolic resin adhesives should have sufficient phenolic hydroxyl groups, many unsubstituted ortho positions, and relatively low molecular weight.238 Thus, to determine which lignin is more suitable to replace phenol, Kalami et al.239 examined and compared the reactivity of various lignins from different sources and isolation processes in the preparation of phenolic resin adhesives. Lignin with a high content of p-hydroxyphenyl or p-coumaric acid appeared to be the best one for the production of lignin-based phenolic adhesives. Hardwood lignin, rich in S units with two ortho positions occupied by methoxy groups, was not reactive towards formaldehyde. Softwood lignin contained a high content of G units with free ortho position, showing the potential to prepare lignin-based phenolic adhesives with 100% of lignin.239 In addition, soda lignin and kraft lignin from coconut husk were compared as phenol substitutes to prepare lignin–phenol–glyoxal wood adhesives.235 Compared with the kraft lignin, the soda lignin had a higher molecular weight, higher thermal stability and higher Tg. Moreover, the higher amount of phenolic hydroxyl groups in the soda lignin made it more reactive. When the content of lignin was 30%, the lignin–phenol–glyoxal wood adhesives from soda lignin showed a higher solid content, higher viscosity and shorter gel time than the adhesives from kraft lignin. In addition, the introduction of lignin showed enhanced tensile strength and the lignin–phenol–glyoxal wood adhesives showed a higher tensile strength than commercial phenol-formaldehyde resin and control wood adhesive. This was because the presence of phenolic groups in lignin led to a higher extent of polycondensation and cross-linking. In addition, the tensile strength of the adhesive from soda lignin was higher than that from kraft lignin.235
When phenol is replaced by lignin in a high proportion, the water resistance of lignin-based phenolic resin adhesives decreases, which may be attributed the low degree of molecular cross-linking and condensation.234,236 Zhang et al.236 prepared a lignin–phenol-formaldehyde resin adhesive with high water resistance under alkaline conditions using furfural as a cross-linking agent. The formation of chemical bonds between furfural and lignin led to a dense cross-linked network, enhancing the water resistance of the adhesive. When the contents of furfural and lignin were 15% and 50%, respectively, the resin showed a moderate solid content and low viscosity. This was because furfural contains epoxy groups, which can efficiently reduce the viscosity as a diluent.236
In addition to the direct use of unmodified lignin, modified lignin from degradation and functionalization can be used to prepare lignin-based phenolic resin adhesives.240 In general, owing to its macromolecular structure, steric hindrance, and insufficient reactive sites, the reactivity of lignin is insufficient.236,239 Thus, converting lignin into small molecules with a chemical structure similar to phenol by degradation has been considered.239,241 For example, kraft lignin was depoly241 merized into monomer-rich lignin oil and oligomer-rich lignin via base-catalyzed degradation. Then, the two depolymerized lignin products were used to prepare lignin phenol formaldehyde resins.241 With an increase in the content of depolymerized lignin products, the resin prepared from oligomer-rich lignin showed an increase in viscosity, whereas the resin prepared from monomer-rich lignin oil had a reduction in viscosity and bonding strength. The lignin oligomers could replace phenol with the substitution rate of 70%. Moreover, the resin prepared from oligomer-rich lignin exhibited similar bonding strength to phenol formaldehyde reference resin.241
In addition, demethylation can convert the methoxy group of the lignin aromatic rings into phenolic hydroxyl groups, resulting in an increase in the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups. HBr and HI were used as demethylation reagents for alkali lignin, and the demethylated lignin was further used to prepare phenolic resin adhesive.242 The content of phenolic hydroxyl group of the demethylated lignin produced by HI increased to 0.67 mmol g−1, which was higher than that of the demethylated lignin (0.64 mmol g−1) produced by HBr and alkali lignin (0.52 mmol g−1). This was because HI had stronger nucleophilicity, resulting in a higher degree of demethylation. When demethylated lignin was used to replace up to 50 wt% of phenol, the bonding strength and formaldehyde emission of the demethylated lignin phenolic resin adhesive could meet the standard for exterior plywood.242
8.2. Lignin-based polyurethane adhesives
Polyurethane adhesives have the advantages of low toxicity, fast drying speed, good storage stability, formaldehyde-free composition and high moisture resistance.130,243,244 Polyurethane adhesives are usually prepared by a polyaddition reaction between polyols and isocyanates.244,245 Lignin has abundant hydroxyl groups, and thus can be used as a partial substitute for polyols to react with isocyanate to construct urethane bonds or allophanate bonds.244 The introduction of an appropriate content of lignin can promote the formation of a three-dimensional cross-linking network, thereby improving the tensile strength and toughness. The cross-linking property between lignin and isocyanate of lignin-based polyurethane adhesives is closely related to the content of hydroxyl groups.130,244
Hydroxymethylation can be used to increase the content of hydroxyl groups by introducing the hydroxymethyl groups on the C5 position of the G units. Chen et al.130 conducted the hydroxymethylation reaction of acetic acid lignin (AAL) with formaldehyde in an alkaline solution. The acetic acid lignin (AAL) was extracted from bagasse. Compared with the acetic acid lignin, the hydroxymethylation treatment increased the content of aliphatic hydroxyl group by 189.11%. Then, lignin-based polyurethane adhesives were prepared by copolymerizing hydroxymethylated lignin (HL), polyethylene glycol 200 (PEG 200) and toluene-2,4-diisocyanate (Fig. 14). Because of the formation of a dense urethane cross-linking between the hydroxymethylated lignin and toluene-2,4-diisocyanate, the mechanical properties and thermal stability of the lignin-based polyurethane adhesive were improved. This work demonstrated that hydroxymethylated lignin can partially replace petroleum-based polyols to prepare lignin-based polyurethane adhesives.130
 Fig. 14  Preparation of lignin-based polyurethane adhesive starting from acetic acid lignin (AAL) extracted from bagasse. Reprinted from ref. 130, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
In addition, the demethylation of lignin is another effective strategy to increase the content of hydroxyl groups by converting methoxy groups into phenolic hydroxyl groups. For example, the demethylation of acetic acid lignin was catalyzed by hydrobromic acid solution.244 The content of hydroxyl groups in the demethylated lignin increased by 36.5%, reaching 5.25 mmol g−1. Lignin-based polyurethane adhesives were prepared by partially replacing polyethylene glycol with demethylated lignin. The introduction of demethylated lignin improved the Tg, Young's modulus, and elongation at break of the polyurethane adhesives. In addition, the lignin-based polyurethane adhesives had high tensile strength and thermal stability, which were attributed to the formation of powerful cross-linking networks between the demethylated lignin and toluene-2,4-diisocyanate.244
9. Lignin for biomaterials
As a natural polyphenolic macromolecule, lignin has excellent antioxidant activity due to its free radical scavenging and chelating ability.45 Besides, it has low cytotoxicity, antimicrobial capacity, biodegradability and biocompatibility.41,246,247 In addition, due to its abundant functional groups, lignin and its derivatives can be used for biomedical treatment after appropriate chemical modification.45,248,249 These characteristics lay a foundation for engineering lignin, including kraft lignin, lignosulfonates, alkali lignin, organosolv lignin, enzymatic hydrolysis lignin and lignin model compounds, into a variety of biomaterials (Table 4). Lignin nanoparticles with biodegradability and stability can be prepared via self-assembly or phase separation techniques. Lignin hydrogels with antimicrobial activity and slow release can be prepared by combining lignin and other functional polymers. These lignin nanoparticles and lignin hydrogels can be used for drug delivery and as antibacterial agents, wound dressings, and tissue engineering scaffolds by encapsulating or not encapsulating the model drugs. Studies indicate that good biomedical performances such as low toxicity, slow release of drugs, antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, and good mechanical performances can be obtained (Table 4).
Table 4 Lignin-containing materials for drug delivery, wound dressing, and tissue engineering scaffolds




Lignin types
Materials
Applications
Loading of drugs
Performance
Ref.




LignoBoost™ softwood kraft lignin
Lignin nanoparticles
Drug delivery
Sorafenib, benzazulene and capecitabine
Low cytotoxicity; enhanced the antiproliferative effect of benzazulene in different cell lines

246



Lignin
Lignin hydrogels
Drug delivery
Hydrophobic drug (curcumin)
Sustaining drug release: up to 4 days

247



Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
Lignin-based hollow nanoparticles
Drug delivery
Antitumor drug hydroxycamptothecin
Low toxicity; drug loading and encapsulation efficiency: 70.6% ± 9% and 22.02% ± 2%

248



Sodium lignosulphonate
Sodium lignosulfonate-grafted poly(acrylic acid-co-poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)) hydrogel
Drug delivery
Amoxicillin
pH-responsive control-release behaviors; the cumulative release rate in simulated gastric fluids: up to 51.5% in 24 h and about 32% for 2 h; the cumulative release rate in intestinal fluids: 84.5% in 24 h and 63.3% after 5 h

256



Alkaline lignin; pretreated lignin from poplar; enzymatic hydrolysis lignin; kraft lignin
Lignin nanoparticles
Drug delivery
Gatifloxacin, doxorubicin hydrochloride and doxorubicin
Eliminating unfavorable factors of restricted processing pH and lignin specie; encapsulation efficiency: up to 90%; sustaining drug-releasing capability and biocompatibility; easy to recycle

251



Kraft lignin (low sulphonate content, M.W. ∼10000 Da)
Lignin nanoparticles
Drug delivery
Irinotecan
Drug loading and encapsulation efficiency: 13.61% ± 0.59% and 67.65% ± 1.95%; drug diffusing out due to difference in concentration gradient

252



Lignin from sulfite papermaking pulp
Lignin–chitosan–PVA composite hydrogel
Wound dressing
No drug
Good bactericidal activity and antioxidant activity; high mechanical strength; large tensile deformation; maintaining a moist healing environment

258



Lignin (low sulfate content)
Carrageenan-based nanocomposite hydrogels
Wound dressing
No drug
Biocompatible against the mouse fibroblast cell line (L929); reducing the wound area to less than 3% within two weeks

259



Lignin
Biomimetic lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel
Wound dressing
No drug
Excellent self-healing properties and bactericidal activity; accelerating wound healing of rat model within 12 days; reuse more than 5 times

260



Alkali lignin
Chitosan–alkali lignin hydrogels
Scaffolds for tissue engineering and wound healing
No drug
Non-toxic to mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and to zebrafish up to 100 μg mL−1in vivo; providing a conducive surface for cell attachment and proliferation; improving cell migration across the scratch of NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblast cell

262



Lignin extracted from wood pulp
Hydrogels
Wound dressing
No drug
Good antibacterial activity; no obvious cytotoxicity to L929 cells in vitro and main organs of rats in vivo; accelerating MRSA-infected wound healing

264



Methanol fractionation of kraft lignin
Lignin–PVA hydrogels
Scaffold for tissue engineering
No drug
Sufficient mechanical stability; a lack of cytotoxicity; allowing the ingrowth of cells into the scaffold

266



Alkali lignin (Mn = 5000 g mol−1)
Polycaprolactone/lignin–polycaprolactone nanofibers
Scaffold for tissue engineering
No drug
Free radical inhibition: 98.3% ± 1.9% within 4 h; promoting the proliferation of Schwann cells

269





9.1. Drug delivery
Lignin nanoparticles (LNPs) are relatively non-toxic, biodegradable, and inexpensive, and can be used as carriers of drugs for drug delivery.41,250 However, the production of LNPs is restricted by pH, solvent, temperature and lignin type.251,252 Thus, to eliminate these unfavorable factors, Chen et al.251 prepared LNPs using different types of lignins at different pH via self-assembly in aqueous sodium p-toluenesulfonate solution.253 Based on hydrotropic chemistry and the synergistic dissociation of the entrapped sodium p-toluenesulfonate and phenolic–OH and –COOH groups of LNPs, the effects of the lignin type and pH value were eliminated. The LNPs were used to encapsulate water-soluble (gatifloxacin and doxorubicin hydrochloride) and water-insoluble (doxorubicin) drugs. The drug-loaded LNPs showed sustained drug release ability. Especially, the encapsulation efficiency of LNPs for the water-insoluble doxorubicin was up to 90%. In the in vivo antitumor tests, the doxorubicin-loaded LNPs exhibited an obvious antitumor effect.251
To ensure the complete self-assembly of the LNPs, the effect of solvent such as deionized water and acidic aqueous medium on their synthesis was explored. Siddiqui et al.252 prepared blank LNPs (BLNPs) through solvent displacement and flash pH change. Specifically, when the dialysis medium was water, the lignin subunits remained deprotonated, resulting in incomplete self-assembly because of the repulsion (Fig. 15a). When the dialysis medium was dilute aqueous HCl, the carboxyl groups of lignin were completely protonated, and the repulsion force became minimum, resulting in uncontrollable self-assembly (Fig. 15b). The carboxylic groups of lignin were partially protonated by removing the dilute aqueous HCl after 4 h. Then, water medium was used to stabilize the charge of the nanoparticles and prevent the further self-assembly of the lignin subunits, resulting in controllable self-assembly (Fig. 15c). The BLNPs with a controllable particle size, negative surface charge, and acceptable % hemolysis were compatible with normal cells and lung cancer cells. The irinotecan-loaded lignin nanoparticles with an irinotecan loading of 13.61% ± 0.59% reduced the IC50 value of irinotecan by nearly 3 folds. In addition, the irinotecan-loaded lignin nanoparticles could sustainably release the drug with the irinotecan release of 86.72% ± 7.05% within 72 h.252
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the preparation of lignin nanoparticles for drug delivery. (a) Incomplete self-assembly in the presence of water. (b) Uncontrollable self-assembly in dilute aqueous HCl. (c) Controllable self-assembly when dilute aqueous HCl was replaced with water after 4 h. Reprinted from ref. 252, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
Effective binding or encapsulation of active drug in lignin nanoparticles is challenging to achieve drug delivery systems.248,253 Thus, lignin-based hollow nanoparticles have been developed as new carriers for drug delivery. Zhou et al.248 prepared modified lignin by grafting β-cyclodextrin on the enzymatic-hydrolysis lignin, and then hollow nanoparticles were prepared via the self-assembly of modified lignin. The introduction of β-cyclodextrin improved the structure of the modified lignin and produced more specific sites for interaction with the antitumor drug hydroxycamptothecin. The modified lignin-based hollow nanoparticles showed a spherical hollow structure and had a larger specific surface area and greater porosity than the lignin-based hollow nanoparticles. The modified lignin-based hollow nanoparticles showed low toxicity, efficient encapsulation of hydroxycamptothecin and good sustained-release capability.248
Targeted lignin nanoparticles have been developed for drug delivery. Zhou et al.254 prepared targeted folic–magnetic-functionalized lignin hollow nanoparticles by incorporating magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and folic acid through layer-by-layer self-assembly. The incorporation of magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and folic acid contributed to improving the capacity of cellular uptake against HeLa cells of the folic–magnetic-functionalized lignin hollow nanoparticles. In addition, owing to the π–π interactions and electrostatic attraction, doxorubicin hydrochloride could be loaded in the folic–magnetic-functionalized lignin hollow nanoparticles with the encapsulation efficiency of 67.5% ± 6%. Compared with other nanoparticles, the doxorubicin hydrochloride-loaded folic–magnetic-functionalized lignin hollow nanoparticles showed a better sustained-release effect and higher anticancer effect, which was attributed to the reduced contact area between the nanoparticles and aqueous buffer solutions after the incorporation of the magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and folic acid.254
In addition to self-assembly technology, the phase separation and cross-linking methods have been used to engineer LNPs. The phase separation for encapsulating drugs within LNPs helps to avoid the toxicity of LNPs. LNPs are produced through the addition of lignin organic solution to an aqueous phase with mechanical agitation, followed by emulsification and solvent-evaporation processes. The cross-linking process affects the stability of LNPs and drug release.255 For example, Alqahtani et al.255 prepared LNPs for the delivery of curcumin via phase separation using citric acid as a cross-linker. The carboxyl groups of citric acid reacted with the hydroxyl groups of lignin to form ester bonds, thereby forming a matrix with enhanced stability and efficient encapsulation. The encapsulation efficiency of curcumin in the LNPs was 92%. Compared with the free curcumin, the curcumin-loaded LNPs enhanced the curcumin cellular uptake and intestinal permeation. In addition, the curcumin-loaded LNPs presented high stability in simulated gastric fluid and released curcumin slowly under intestinal conditions. Compared with curcumin after oral administration, the curcumin-loaded LNPs increased the bioavailability and half-life of curcumin.255
Lignin hydrogels have been studied as a matrix for drug delivery because of their non-cytotoxicity, antimicrobial activity, biodegradability and slow release.256,257 A sodium lignosulfonate-grafted poly(acrylic acid-co-poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)) hydrogel was synthesized via radical polymerization.256 The amoxicillin-loaded lignin hydrogel showed controllable release behavior by adjusting the pH value in vitro. In simulated gastric fluids (pH = 1.2 ± 0.2) and intestinal fluids (pH = 7.4 ± 0.1), the cumulative release of amoxicillin in 24 h reached 51.5% and 84.5%, respectively.256 In addition, Larrañeta et al.247 prepared lignin-based hydrogels through the esterification reaction of lignin with poly(ethylene glycol) and poly(methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic acid). With the help of microwave radiation, the cross-linking time was significantly reduced to 1 h. The lignin contents of the lignin-based hydrogels ranged between 40% and 24%. The water uptake capability of the lignin-based hydrogels was up to 500%. The lignin hydrogels could load curcumin owing to the hydrophobicity of lignin and control the release of curcumin for up to 4 days. Moreover, the lignin-based hydrogels showed significant antimicrobial activities towards Staphylococcus aureus and Proteus mirabilis.247
9.2. Wound dressings
Wound healing is usually a slow, dynamic, and complicated process. Ideal wound dressings should prevent microbial invasion and infection, accelerate healing, and inhibit scar formation.258–260 Hydrogels can act as a wound dressing because they provide a barrier to microorganisms and a moist environment for wound healing. In addition, they have flexibility, biocompatibility and a high water content.259–261 However, their insufficient mechanical strength and poor antioxidant and antimicrobial activities limit their application as wound dressings.258,260 Lignin presents good antioxidant and antimicrobial activities, impact resistance, and tensile properties.258 Thus, the addition of lignin to hydrogels may improve their application as wound dressings.
Chitosan is an antibacterial biomacromolecule with many active amino groups. Alkali lignin is non-toxic and biocompatible. It can be used as a cheap and effective cross-linker for chitosan to prepare chitosan–lignin hydrogels for wound healing. Ravishankar et al.262 prepared chitosan–lignin hydrogels via ionotropic cross-linking based on the electrostatic interactions between the phenoxide groups in alkali lignin and ammonium groups in chitosan. These chitosan–lignin hydrogels were non-toxic to mesenchymal stem cells in vitro. When the concentration of the chitosan–lignin hydrogels was less than 100 μg mL−1, they were non-toxic to zebrafish in vivo. To investigate the ability of chitosan–lignin hydrogels to accelerate wound healing, the wound healing in the NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblast cell line was studied. The chitosan–lignin hydrogels improved the migration ability of mouse fibroblast cells in the wound.262 However, although the PVA–chitosan hydrogel has good antibacterial ability and biocompatibility, it has poor mechanical strength and unsatisfactory environmental regulation capability for wound healing. Zhang et al.258 prepared a lignin–chitosan–PVA composite hydrogel. The composite hydrogel showed strong tensile strength and large elongation, which was attributed to the three-dimensional structure of lignin, the formation of many hydrogen bonds between PVA, lignin and chitosan, and ionic bonds between sulfonate groups in lignin and amino groups in chitosan. Due to the addition of lignin, the composite hydrogel showed antioxidant and antibacterial activities. Moreover, the composite hydrogel provided a moist environment, resulting in faster wound healing than the PVA–chitosan hydrogel in the mouse model with a wound closure rate of 87% at the 10th day.258
Various antimicrobial substances have been introduced in hydrogels to prepare antimicrobial lignin hydrogel dressings. By introducing bactericidal poly(ionic liquids) on the surface of lignin, a novel lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel dressing (HILx) was obtained based on the supramolecular interactions between lignin and poly(ionic liquids) (Fig. 16).260 The composite hydrogel dressing showed good self-healing property, which was attributed to the formation of ionic bonds between the positive ions of the poly(ionic liquids) and negative ions of lignin. Due to its capabilities of protein adsorption, antibacterial activity, water retention, and free radical scavenging, the lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel dressing promoted wound healing in Sprague-Dawley rats. With an increase in the content of lignin in the composite hydrogel dressing, the speed of wound healing accelerated. In addition, the composite hydrogel dressing exhibited excellent antibacterial properties against S. aureus and E. coli. After disinfection with boiling water, the composite hydrogel dressing maintained good antibacterial properties and could be used for more than 5 times (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Preparation and characteristics of lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel dressing (HILx). The content of lignin in HIL0, HIL1, HIL2 and HIL3 was 0 wt%, 20 wt%, 40 wt% and 60 wt%, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 260, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
The incorporation of AgNPs in hydrogels not only can improve the mechanical properties of hydrogels, but also provide antibacterial activity.259,263 Using lignin as a reducing and capping agent, carrageenan-based hydrogels for wound dressing were prepared through lignin-mediated AgNP synthesis in carrageenan cross-linked with divalent cations.259 Owing to the presence of many reducing functional groups such as phenolic hydroxyl and methoxy groups in lignin, the addition of lignin to carrageenan promoted the conversion of Ag+ to AgNPs.259,264 The addition of AgNPs improved the mechanical strength and antibacterial activity. When the divalent cation was Mg2+, the obtained carrageenan-based hydrogels promoted wound healing in Sprague-Dawley rats. The wound area decreased exponentially with the treatment time, and the wound area decreased to 3% at 14 days.259 In addition to being a reducing agent to prepare AgNPs, lignin has strong antioxidant properties derived from its reducing functional groups such as phenolic hydroxyl and methoxy groups, which is conducive to scavenging free radicals.264 Deng et al.264 prepared hydrogels with antibacterial and antioxidant properties as wound dressings by combining AgNPs reduced by lignin in situ and phenylboronic acid-modified hydroxypropyl cellulose. The hydrogels showed good antibacterial activity against C. albicans, E. coli, S. aureus, and MRSA. Moreover, the hydrogels had no obvious cytotoxicity to L929 cells in vitro and main organs of rats in vivo. In the presence of lignin with free radical scavenging ability derived from its catechol structure, the scavenging rate of hydrogels to the 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl free radical was more than 92%. Furthermore, the hydrogels showed good tissue adhesion, which was attributed to the quinone/catechol structure between the lignin and AgNPs. In addition, hydrogels as wound dressings maintained a moist environment and accelerated MRSA-infected wound healing.264
9.3. Tissue engineering scaffolds
Tissue engineering scaffolds are designed to mimic the extracellular matrix to support and promote the growth and regeneration of specific tissues.41 In recent years, lignin hydrogels and lignin nanofibers have been studied as tissue engineering scaffolds. The presence of lignin endows hydrogels or nanofibers with good antioxidant and antibacterial activities and mechanical properties.265
Lignin with a stiffening effect and antioxidant activity is advantageous for the fabrication of hydrogel scaffolds.266 The stiffening effect of lignin contributes to improving the mechanical properties of hydrogel scaffolds.266 The antioxidant activity of lignin helps protect cells from oxidative stress.266,267 Thus, hydrogel scaffolds with enhanced mechanical and biological properties based on PVA and methanol fraction of kraft lignin were prepared.266 The mechanical properties of the hydrogel scaffolds were related to the content of methanol fraction of kraft lignin. Moreover, the scaffold exhibited no cytotoxicity when in direct contact with NIH/3T3 cells. In addition, the NIH/3T3 cells could grow on the scaffolds, and the scaffolds with lower amounts of methanol fraction of kraft lignin showed greater cell growth. When the content of methanol fraction of kraft lignin was 1 wt%, the obtained scaffold allowed cells to grow homogeneously, and showed sufficient mechanical stability.266 In addition, hydrogel scaffolds with antioxidant activity and biocompatibility were prepared by 3D printing using spherical lignin nanoparticles, cellulose nanofibril hydrogels and alginate.267 The hydrogel scaffolds showed antioxidant activity, which increased with an increase in the concentration of the spherical lignin nanoparticles. The hydrogel scaffolds showed high water retention capacity and the relative rehydration ratio could reach 80%, which was advantageous to adjusting the content of water and cell culture. Moreover, the hydrogel scaffolds showed good biocompatibility and promoted the proliferation of HepG2 cells on the surfaces and inside the hydrogel scaffolds.267
Nanofibrous scaffolds for tissue engineering should have appropriate mechanical properties and good biological activity. Thus, the effect of lignin on the nanofibrous scaffolds was examined. Nanofibrous scaffolds were prepared by adding kraft lignin nanoparticles to electrospun PVA–poly(glycerol sebacate) fibers.268 The nanofibrous scaffolds presented a smooth morphology and uniform diameter. With an increase in lignin content, the mean diameter decreased from 530 to 370 nm. Moreover, the Young's modulus of the nanofibrous scaffolds increased from 0.1 MPa to 0.4 MPa with an increase in lignin content, which was attributed to the presence of lignin as a reinforcement material. In addition, the addition of lignin improved the proliferation of PC12 cells, and the proliferation rate increased with an increase in the lignin content. Furthermore, lignin can promote the differentiation of neural cell.268 Lignin, as a scavenger of oxygen free radicals, can protect cells against excessive reactive oxygen species, which is important for promoting nerve regeneration. Wang et al.269 prepared lignin–polycaprolactone copolymers via solvent-free ROP. Then, nanofibrous scaffolds were prepared by electrospinning a mixture of lignin–polycaprolactone copolymers and polycaprolactone. The introduction of lignin–polycaprolactone copolymers improved the mechanical properties of the nanofibrous scaffolds. The nanofibrous scaffolds had good antioxidant activities, and the addition of a higher amount of lignin–polycaprolactone copolymer produced higher free radical inhibition. The highest free radical inhibition of the nanofibrous scaffolds was 98.3 ± 1.9%. Moreover, the nanofibrous scaffolds could protect Schwann cells from excessive reactive oxygen species due to the hydroxyl and methoxyl groups of lignin donating hydrogen to end the oxidation propagation reaction. In addition, the nanofibrous scaffolds promoted the proliferation of Schwann cells.269
To expand the application of lignin in the biomedical field, several technical issues need to be solved. Due to the complex nature and undefined structure of lignin, research on its structure–activity relationship is beneficial to broaden its processing and application window. The mechanical properties and biological characteristics such as biodegradability, biocompatibility and cytotoxicity of lignin-based biomaterials need to be confirmed prior to clinical trials. In addition, it is necessary to further study the action mechanism of lignin for targeted drug delivery, wound healing and tissue engineering.
10. Lignin films for functional packaging
Films are usually made from petroleum-derived polymers and have a wide range of applications in the field of food packaging, electronic products, etc.22 Considering the renewability, biodegradability, and antibacterial activity of lignin as a natural polymer, it can be used as an active component or functional filler for films.270–272 In addition, lignin has strong ultraviolet light (UV) absorption owing to the formation of a conjugated system of unsaturated double bonds and benzene rings.45,273 Furthermore, lignin has antioxidant activity because its free phenolic hydroxyl groups can be used as radical scavengers.22
Currently, a variety of chemical preservatives and antimicrobials are used to extend the shelf life of food.22,274 However, the excessive intake of preservatives and antimicrobials may be harmful to human health. It has been reported that films with lignin in them possess antibacterial and antioxidant activities. When they are shaped and used for food packaging, the shelf life of food can be improved. Sirviö et al.275 prepared lignin-containing cationic wood nanofiber films from sawdust without removing the wood content via cationization, mechanical disintegration and solvent casting. The films exhibited strong ultraviolet light adsorption due to the presence of lignin. Moreover, individualized cellulosic and lignin nanomaterials played a role in reducing the oxygen transmission and swelling of the films, respectively, and thus the films showed high oxygen barrier properties. In addition, E. coli and S. aureus were used to investigate the antimicrobial properties of the films. Bacterial anti-adhesive properties with a small inhibition zone were observed, which may be attributed to the cationized lignin and hemicellulose acting as antimicrobial agents. However, further studies need to identify the true antimicrobial components and the mechanism.275
Owing to the high thermal stability, and strong antibacterial activity of AgNPs, they have been widely used to prepare films for food packaging.276 Shankar et al.274 prepared AgNPs using organosolv lignin as a reducing and capping agent, and then PLA/lignin/AgNP composite films were prepared by incorporating AgNPs in poly(lactide) (PLA) polymer. The addition of lignin, which can absorb ultraviolet light, enhanced the UV-barrier property of the composite films. Moreover, the thermal stability of the composite films increased because lignin and AgNPs are more thermally stable than the PLA matrix. In addition, the tensile strength of the composite films increased, which may be attributed to the good dispersion of lignin and AgNPs in the PLA matrix. Due to the presence of AgNPs, the composite films exhibited good antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes, showing better antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli. Thus, these films may have the potential in food packaging to inhibit bacterial growth and maintain food quality.274
Due to their excellent UV resistance and antioxidant properties, lignin nanoparticles (LNPs) may be suitable for preparing functional films.277 Binary (PVA/LNP and CH/LNP) and ternary (PVA/CH/LNP) polymeric films based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), chitosan (CH) and LNPs were prepared by solvent casting.278 In the presence of LNP, PVA/LNP had higher tensile strength and Young's modulus than PVA. Owing to the good dispersion of LNP in the CH matrix, a toughness effect was produced. The introduction of LNP and CH improved the elongation at break of PVA, which can be attributed to the linking between ether linkages and benzene rings in lignin as internal plasticizers. Moreover, LNP enhanced the thermal stability and UV resistance of the films. Furthermore, the binary and ternary polymeric films showed antibacterial activity against Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora and Xanthomonas arboricola pv. Pruni. The addition of LNP and CH enhanced the antioxidant activity of the films.278
Because of the high heterogeneity of the lignin structure, the prepared LNPs presented differences in properties, which may influence the performance of the films. For example, two types of uniform LNPs were prepared via the self-assembly of DES lignin and organosolv lignin extracted from DES and organosolv extraction, respectively. Then, by incorporating LNPs into the PVA matrix, nanocomposite films were fabricated.277 Two types of LPNs showed a spherical morphology with a core–shell nanostructure, and the particle size distribution of the LNPs prepared from DES lignin was more uniform. The nanocomposite films prepared from two types of LNPs showed both high UV shielding and antioxidant activity owing to the addition of LNPs. Moreover, the LPNs prepared from organosolv lignin possessed a higher content of total phenolic hydroxyl groups, resulting in the nanocomposite film exhibiting higher antioxidant activity and UV-shielding. In addition, because of good interfacial adhesion between the LNPs and PVA matrix, the mechanical and thermal performances of the nanocomposite films were improved.277
Considering the concepts of green chemistry and sustainable development, it is necessary to develop green films to replace non-biodegradable and petroleum-derived films.272 Although the research on lignin films has made great progress, some technical and economic challenges still need to be overcome to realize their commercialization. Firstly, for food packaging applications, adequate toxicological studies need to be conducted to ensure the safety of lignin films.272 In addition, there have complex preparation processes, high cost, and unsatisfactory compatibility between lignin and other polymers.279 Thus, it is necessary to develop green and efficient systems to prepare lignin films with desirable functions.
11. Lignin-based slow/controlled release fertilizers
Slow/controlled release fertilizers have been developed to avoid the loss of fertilizer and supply nutrients sustainably.280 As a natural urease inhibitor, lignin can inhibit the activity of urease to slow down the decomposition rate of urea and improve the utilization efficiency of nitrogen.281,282 Lignin itself is the precursor of humic acid, which can be degraded into humus by soil microorganisms, thus improving the content of soil organic matter and soil fertility.283,284 Moreover, through modification with different elements, especially nitrogen, lignin can possess high biological activity, anti-leaching, and long-term stability.23
In the past decade, lignin has been used to prepare various slow/controlled release fertilizers, which can be classified as lignin-based organic nitrogen fertilizers and lignin-based coated fertilizers.282,284 Lignin-based organic nitrogen fertilizers are slow-release fertilizers, aiming to replace inorganic urea fertilizers with organic bound nitrogen structure to slow down the conversion time to plant-available nitrogen.285 Lignin-based coated fertilizers are controlled-release fertilizers, which can be controlled by adjusting the coating, where the hydrophobic lignin coating provides a physical barrier against water to delay the dissolution and release of fertilizer.285,286
11.1. Lignin-based organic nitrogen fertilizers
During the crop growth cycle, slow-release nitrogen fertilizers can continuously release nitrogen for its utilization. When lignin-based organic nitrogen fertilizer is used, the nitrogen-containing groups are gradually degraded under the action of microorganisms, resulting in low nitrogen release rate.282 Nitrogen is mainly introduced into the structure of lignin via ammoxidation and Mannich reaction, leading to the formation of aminated lignin. However, owing to the presence of only a few active sites in lignin feedstock, the obtained aminated lignin has a relatively low content of nitrogen.284 Thus, depolymerization and phenolation are employed to enhance the activity of lignin before the Mannich reaction.128,135 For example, Wang et al.128 carried out the alcoholic depolymerization of alkali lignin. The depolymerized lignin had low molecular weights and a high content of phenolic hydroxyl groups. The depolymerization temperature and solvent concentration were important influencing factors. Then, the Mannich reaction was used to introduce amine groups into the ortho positions of the phenolic hydroxyl groups in the depolymerized lignin. The obtained aminated lignin had a higher content of amine groups than that of the aminated lignin produced from alkali lignin, which was attributed to the increase in the number of active sites in the depolymerized lignin. When the depolymerization temperature was 240 °C, and the concentration of ethanol/water was 50%, aminated lignin with the highest content of amine groups was obtained.128 The obtained aminated lignin could be used to prepare fertilizer.
Phenolation pretreatment can increase the number of active sites by introducing phenol in the structure of lignin. Jiao et al.284 prepared aminated lignin via phenolation pretreatment of lignin, followed by Mannich reaction between the phenolated lignin, amination reagent and formaldehyde under alkaline conditions. The active sites in the phenolated lignin increased to 8.26 mmol g−1. In addition, the nitrogen content of aminated lignin mainly depended on the amination reagent used. Ethanediamine was the most favorable for the Mannich reaction. Aminated lignin with a high content of nitrogen (10.13%) and low ratio of C/N (6.08) could be obtained when the amount of ethanediamine was 15 g, temperature was 70 °C, and the reaction time was 180 min during the Mannich reaction. The soil column leaching experiment showed that the aminated lignin began to degrade after 28 days and released nitrogen slowly.284 Therefore, these aminated lignins show potential to prepare high-efficiency nitrogen fertilizers. Similarly, Wang et al.282 prepared lignin-based organic nitrogen fertilizers through the phenolation of alkali lignin, and subsequent amination process under microwave heating. The organic nitrogen content increased in the aminated lignin with an increase in the ethylenediamine content, microwave heating temperature or time. The aminated lignin with the highest content of organic nitrogen (7.84%) was obtained when the amount of ethylenediamine was 8.0 g, the microwave heating temperature was 80 °C, and the time was 40 min. The aminated lignin had low wettability, reducing the risk of loss with water. Moreover, the thermal stability of the aminated lignin was enhanced because of the introduction of amine groups. In addition, the aminated lignin had a high negative zeta potential, which was conducive to improving the permeability of the structure of soil.282 Thus, aminated lignin may exhibit good nitrogen slow-release behavior.
11.2. Lignin-based coated fertilizers
Lignin-based coated fertilizers can release nutrients gradually, improve the nutrient utilization and boost plant productivity.287 Lignin is renewable, biodegradable and relatively hydrophobic, and thus a lignin coating can act as a physical barrier to prevent moisture from entering the fertilizer core and prevent nutrients from diffusing outward.288 Lignin-based coated fertilizers can be prepared through the co-melting of lignin and urea, followed by pelletization, or through coating lignin directly on the surface of urea with the help of coating equipment.285 The slow release of lignin-based coated fertilizers is achieved by rupture mechanism or diffusion mechanism.288 In the case of the rupture mechanism, moisture enters the coating to dissolve nutrients, and then a high osmotic pressure is produced between internal and external coating. Finally, the coating cracks and releases the nutrients (Fig. 17a). For the diffusion mechanism, the driving force is the difference in nutrient concentration inside and outside the coating (Fig. 17b).288
 Fig. 17  Possible release mechanism of lignin-based coated fertilizer. (a) Rupture mechanism. (b) Diffusion mechanism. Adapted and reprinted from ref. 288, copyright (2021), with permission from Elsevier. 
Urea is a commonly used fast-release nitrogen fertilizer. Due to its low thermal stability and high water solubility, urea is lost through volatilization, evaporation, and leaching, resulting in a low nitrogen utilization efficiency and environmental hazards.289,290 The nitrogen utilization efficiency of urea can be improved by reducing nitrogen release and/or inhibiting its conversion into NH4+ and NO3−. A PLA–lignin coating was prepared for urea by blending industrial softwood kraft lignin with polylactic acid (PLA), and then the PLA–lignin coated fertilizer was prepared by the dip-coating of urea with PLA–lignin coating.285 Lignin was pre-functionalized via esterification or Mannich reaction. Compared with the non-functionalized lignin, the esterified lignin had higher hydrophobicity. Due to the physical barrier to water, the release and dissolution of urea in water were significantly delayed. Mannich reaction was performed to introduce organically bound nitrogen into aminated lignin, providing additional nitrogen for fertilizer. Compared with the uncoated urea, the PLA–lignin-coated fertilizers significantly delayed the release of urea.285
Phosphorus (P) is an essential nutrient for the growth of crops. However, due to its sorption, precipitation or microbial immobilization, more than 80% of P becomes unavailable for crops.291 Thus, the available form of phosphate fertilizers needs to be further improved to increase its bioavailability in soil.292 To enhance the efficiency of phosphate fertilizers, coated triple superphosphate fertilizers were prepared by spraying different formulations of lignin and κ-carrageenan with or without polyethylene glycol at regular intervals to cover triple superphosphate.292 The coated triple superphosphate fertilizers with polyethylene glycol and without polyethylene glycol showed lower release behavior of P within 6 h than uncoated triple superphosphate, which was attributed to the good mechanical properties, hydrophobicity and low solubility in water of the coated triple superphosphate fertilizers. The release amount of P from the coated triple superphosphate fertilizers with polyethylene glycol and without polyethylene glycol was 13.51% ± 3.68% and 28.22% ± 4.81%, respectively.292 In addition, the composite coatings for triple superphosphate fertilizers could be prepared using lignin from olive pomace and some polysaccharides (alginates, carrageenan and carboxymethyl cellulose).293 The coating based on lignin and carrageenan showed the highest water absorbency and elastic modulus. The coating based on lignin and polysaccharides had good interaction and adhesion with the surface of the triple superphosphate fertilizers. Compared with the 100% of P release from the uncoated triple superphosphate, the P release from the coated triple superphosphate decreased to about 60% within 72 h.293
12. Integration of degradation, functionalization and fabrication of functional materials
At present, in many cases, lignin valorization on a large scale cannot be achieved by single degradation or functionalization. Accordingly, the interplay and integration of these processes may be an alternative solution to overcome this. In this way, it also brings the possibly of new strategies and novel materials. For example, provided that depolymerized lignin can be in situ functionalized, the operations for the separation of the products will be eliminated or at least reduced, and thus the routes to the final products will be shortened. These well conform to some principles of green chemistry.
Typically, the one-pot depolymerization and phenolation of lignin have been achieved by solid acid catalytic phenolation treatment. In the process developed by Wang et al.294 using HZSM-5 as a catalyst, enzymatic hydrolysis lignin was depolymerized in phenol/water solvent at 140 °C. Compared with the original enzymatic hydrolysis lignin, the molecular weight of the depolymerized lignin decreased from 6695 to 2418 g mol−1. Meanwhile, phenol was incorporated in the depolymerized lignin through a nucleophilic reaction, resulting in an increase of the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups and high reactivity toward formaldehyde. This treated lignin could be used to replace 50% of phenol, producing phenolic foam with good thermal insulation and compression strength.294 Similarly, the one-pot depolymerization, demethylation and phenolation of soda lignin could be performed in phenol using HBr as a catalyst.295 After these integrated reactions, compared with the original soda lignin, the content of phenolic hydroxyl groups in the obtained product increased by 104%, and the content of methoxyl groups decreased by 30%. The obtained product could be directly used to prepare phenolic foams. Compared with the unmodified lignin-based phenolic foam, modified lignin-based phenolic foam had better thermal insulation and mechanical properties.295
The functionalization of lignin can be used to protect specific functional groups, which will facilitate its subsequent degradation. For example, the hydroxyl groups of lignin can induce lignin to form quinone intermediates and promote the pyrolytic formation of coke during pyrolysis, which causes has an impact on the yield of bio-oil.296–298 Thus, to improve the pyrolysis efficiency, the pre-masking of hydroxyl groups may be an effective method.
It has been revealed that the acetylation of hydroxyl groups has a positive effect on the subsequent pyrolysis of lignin. As demonstrated in the recent study by Li et al.,296 lignins with different acetylation degrees were prepared by treating pine kraft lignin with choline chloride/acetic anhydride. Choline chloride/acetic anhydride showed high acetylation efficiency towards aliphatic hydroxyl groups and phenolic hydroxyl groups, and the acetylation efficiency was about 99.1% and 94.0%, respectively. With an increase in the acetylation degree, the hydrogen to carbon effective ratio of acetylated lignin increased, which may help to inhibit the formation of coke during the pyrolysis of lignin. When the fast pyrolysis of acetylated lignin was carried out, the acetylation of hydroxyl groups improved the yield of bio-oil and reduced the formation of coke. In addition, a positive correlation between the relative content of H-phenols produced by the fast pyrolysis of acetylated lignin and acetylation degree of hydroxyl group was observed. There was a positive correlation between the relative content of H-phenols produced by the fast pyrolysis of acetylated lignin and acetylation degree of the hydroxyl groups of lignin.296
The oxypropylation of the phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin is also a masking strategy. The oxypropylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin affects its subsequent pyrolysis.297 For example, treating softwood kraft lignin with propylene oxide can lead to oxypropylated lignin. The oxypropylation reaction was performed in NaOH solution at 40 °C, and propylene oxide had an oxypropylation selectivity of about 94% towards phenolic hydroxyl groups (Fig. 18). When the fast pyrolysis of oxypropylated lignin was carried out, the maximum degradation rate and the yield of bio-oil of oxypropylated lignin were improved with an increase in the oxypropylation degree. Moreover, the relative content of H-phenols and aromatic hydrocarbons from the fast pyrolysis of oxypropylated lignin showed a positive relationship with the degree of oxypropylation.297 In addition to the acetylation and oxypropylation of the hydroxyl groups of lignin, the methylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups of lignin over zeolite Y catalyst will help to enhance the yield of aromatic hydrocarbons and inhibit side reactions during the subsequent pyrolysis of lignin.298 The processes of degradation and functionalization can be combined with the fabrication of functional materials. Particularly, the direct incorporation of extracted lignin without functionalization in other polymers is desirable primarily due to its simplicity and high atom economy. The adverse structural alterations of lignin during extraction processes led to unsatisfactory reactivity and properties, which greatly hinder its incorporation in polymers.299 Functionalization strategies for lignin have been developed to improve its reactivity, resulting in its improved dispersion and compatibility with polymers.
 Fig. 18  Selective oxypropylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups in softwood kraft lignin using propylene oxide. Adapted and reprinted from ref. 297, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
Functionalization of aromatic ring, including hydroxymethylation, amination, sulfonation and sulfomethylation has been performed to introduce hydroxymethyl group, amine group, sulfonate group and methylene sulfonate group into the structure of lignin. Hydroxymethylated lignin has a high content of hydroxyl groups and has been used as a substitute for part of phenol and polyol to produce phenol-formaldehyde resins300 and polyurethane adhesives.130 Aminated lignin has a high content of amine groups, high dispersion, and high charge density, and thus it can be used to prepare slow-release fertilisers,284 adsorbents301 and polyurethane films.302 Sulfomethylated lignin shows a high charge density and good dispersion, and can be used as dispersant142 and dye flocculant.303
Phenolation and esterification are employed to introduce phenolic hydroxyl groups and esters groups in the structure of lignin. Phenolated lignin has many cross-linking sites and active sites, which can be used to prepare epoxy resins and phenolic resins. In addition, esterified lignin has good dispersibility in polymers and lipophilicity. Incorporating the esterified lignin into polymers can alter the thermal and mechanical properties of materials.304 As discussed in previous sections, combining lignin with functional polymers by ring-opening polymerization and atom transfer radical polymerization can produce lignin-grafted copolymers with improved properties. Thus, it is reasonably expected the functionalization of lignin can also be in situ integrated with these polymerization reactions, thereby leading to a large class of novel materials.
13. Techno-economic analysis for lignin valorization
Regarding the large-scale application of lignin, a techno-economic analysis of the market demand and economic potential of lignin-based chemicals and materials is very important. This can predict which technologies should be prioritized and whether they can be scaled up even if they are mature on a laboratory scale. At present, more than 50 million tons of lignin is produced annually from the pulping industry and cellulosic bioethanol industry.9 According to the U.S. Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, it is estimated that up to 21 billion gallons of biofuel from lignocellulosic biomass will be produced by 2022, accompanied by about 62 million tons of lignin as by-product.13 Thus, strategies for lignin valorization will improve the circular economy and sustainability of the pulping industry and cellulosic bioethanol industry.65,305
Experimentally, lignin has potential for the production of many fine chemicals and fuels through its degradation. However, in practice, only a few chemicals generated from lignin can find a large market. For example, phenol generated from lignin was commercialized in 2015.306 The annual production of phenol produced from lignin is about 8 million tons and its total market value is estimated at 12–15 billion dollars per year (Table 5).17,306 Nowadays, in industry, 99% of phenol is mainly produced by the oxidation of cumene with an annual output of about 11 × 106 tons in 2018.307 Phenol is an important industrial commodity, which is mainly used to prepare bisphenol A, phenolic resins, Polyamide 6 and other phenol derivatives such as aniline and salicylic acid.307 In addition, vanillin produced from lignin was commercialized via the oxidation of lignosulfonate since 1937.2 The annual production of vanillin produced from lignin is about 16000 tons, and its total market value is estimated at 0.2 billion dollars per year (Table 5).17,306 At present, lignin-based vanillin and petroleum-based vanillin are the two main sources of commercial vanillin, and their global market is about 15% and 85%, respectively.308 Vanillin is mainly used as a food additive (accounting for 60% of vanillin), cosmetic ingredients (accounting for 33% of vanillin) and pharmaceuticals (accounting for 7% of vanillin).308 Compared with fossil-based phenol and vanillin, lignin-based phenol and vanillin are relatively expensive and produced in small quantities.35 Furthermore, the complex mixed products from the degradation of lignin are another obstacle in scaling up the processing and utilization of lignin. It is technically and economically challenging to separate and purify a single compound such as phenol and vanillin from complex product streams.65,76 In addition, many degradations of lignin reported in the literature are merely demonstrative routes or processes on a laboratory scale. The feedstocks used are technical lignin and lignin models without considering the structural complexity of native lignin.
Table 5 Annual production, total market value, price and application of lignin-based commercial chemicals




Commercial chemicals
Annual production (ton)
Total market value (billion dollars per year)
Price ($ per kg)
Application
Ref.




Lignin-based phenol
8000000
12–15
1–1.5
For the preparation of bisphenol A, phenolic resins, Polyamide 6 and other phenol derivatives

17, 306 and 307


Lignin-based vanillin
16000
0.2
12
Food additive, cosmetic ingredient, and pharmaceuticals

17, 306 and 308




Intensive research has indicated that lignin or its modified forms can be used for energy materials, adsorbents, catalysts and biomaterials. It has been reported that lignin-based carbon fibers are close to commercialization.17,306 At present, about 90% of commercial carbon fibers is prepared via the carbonization process of polyacrylonitrile, while a small percentage is made from rayon or petroleum pitch.309 The total capacity of carbon fibers is about 160 ktons in 2022. The market value of carbon fibers was about 7 billion USD in 2020, which is estimated to increase to 8.9 billion USD by 2031.309 Lignin has a high content of carbon, and thus it can be used as a precursor for carbon fibers. To promote the development of lignin-based materials, there is no doubt that novel functionalization strategies have been well developed experimentally. However, the degree of lignin functionalization is not easy to control. Moreover, many of these technologies are also limited to being feasible on a laboratory scale. It is necessary to explore technically and economically feasible functionalization strategies and integrate them into chemical industry to produce value-added materials.
There are some limitations in the production of chemicals and materials from lignin. In addition to the urgent need for various effective extraction and conversion technologies, production costs and environmental impacts should also be considered. Furthermore, as an emerging industry, it also faces problems such as insufficient resource allocation and fierce market competition. Thus, policy support and capital investment are needed to encourage research on the valorization of lignin. Business owners, policy makers, government agencies and researchers should cooperate to gradually develop the application potential of lignin.
14. Conclusion: challenges and outlooks
As discussed above, in the past decade, great progress has been made in the extraction, degradation and functionalization of lignin. By means of employing green solvents, enzymatic and physical–chemical extraction, lignin with more near-native structure and high purity can be obtained. Through top-down degradation methods, lignin is converted into small molecular compounds, yielding a large number of value-added chemicals such as phenols, aldehydes and carboxylic acids. Based on bottom-up functionalization strategies, lignin macromonomers with new functions and high reactivity are generated. The lignin and functionalized lignin present potential capabilities to prepare functional materials such as energy materials, biomaterials, adsorbents, catalysts, films and fertilizers. However, despite the tremendous progress made, there are some unsolved scientific issues and techno-economic challenges in the process of lignin industrialization.
Firstly, although both industrial and lab-scaled extraction processes have been developed, under many circumstances, the original lignin structure is essentially changed after extraction. Moreover, owing to the high cost and the production of a great deal of wastewater and toxic by-products, there are negative environmental and economic impacts. In addition, the sources of lignin and processing conditions have a great impact on its structure, properties and suitability. Thus, extraction methods matching different plant sources and targeted applications should be further studied. Novel green and sustainable extraction strategies should be explored to produce lignin with high purity, uniform and uncondensed structure. This is also critical to the degradation, functionalization and valorization of lignin.
Secondly, most of the existing degradation and functionalization technologies are conducted on a laboratory scale. Furthermore, it is difficult to effectively control the degree of degradation and functionalization of lignin, and the efficient separation and purification of the degradation products is challenging. Thus, the resultant lignin fragment and functionalized lignin show variable chemical structures and different reactivity. In this context, on the one hand, future research should focus on the development of high-efficiency catalytic systems, including highly selective catalysts, specific chemical reactions, and green and efficient solvents, for the directional degradation and functionalization of lignin according to specific uses. On the other hand, efficient and economical technologies for separating the degradation products of lignin need to be further explored. In addition, according to the characteristics and applicability of each method, novel combination technologies for the degradation and functionalization of lignin should be developed. The interplay and combination of degradation and functionalization strategies into one step may bring about new routes for the valorization of lignin and even novel materials.
Thirdly, a serious obstacle in the valorization of lignin is the lack of quick and comprehensive methods for the analysis of the structure of lignin. The qualitative and quantitative determination of its structural characteristics is the challenging issue. Due to the diversity of lignin sources, the structure of lignin is complex and diverse. Although numerous analytical methods have been developed to elucidate the structure and composition of lignin, it is still unclear to date. The existing analytical methods can obtain the molecular weight, functional groups, linkages and monomer types of lignin. However, the specific connection modes among its structural units remain to be explored. Therefore, advanced analysis techniques are needed for clarifying the structure of lignin. The precise identification of the structure and composition of lignin, especially its chemical bonds and functional groups distribution, will open a new prospect for its valorization.
Fourthly, during the conversion of lignin, owing to the diversity of the structure, composition and physicochemical properties of lignin, its degradation and functionalization are necessary to obtain lignin-based materials. However, only some active chemical bonds and functional groups can be used for chemical modification. More importantly, they are usually destroyed and their total number is seriously reduced during the extraction of lignin. Thus, to overcome these problems, on the one hand, the application potential of other chemical bonds and functional groups in the structure of lignin should be developed. On the other hand, the direct application technology of lignin without modification should be developed, which may help to reduce the production cost of lignin-based materials and broaden the application window of lignin. Because of the limited scientific understanding about how the structure of lignin affects its reactivity and processability, it is important to develop lignin utilization systems and design suitable production routes by establishing the relationships among the structure, degradation, and functionalization of lignin and lignin-based materials.
To date, the transformation and utilization of lignin still present some significant obstacles and challenges to both academia and industry. Following the valorization chain from raw lignocellulose to lignin, and from lignin to lignin-based chemicals and materials, future efforts should be focused on the following aspects: how to define the structure of lignin accurately and quickly, how to isolate clean and efficient lignin with desired structures and properties, and how to design innovative downstream processing strategies to produce valuable chemicals and functional materials in a green way. It is expected that problem-focused research on the valorization of lignin will add new alternative processes to sustainable and green chemical industry.
Author contributions
Mei Jiao Gan: investigation, methodology, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing; Yu Qin Niu and Xue Jing Qu: review & editing; Chun Hui Zhou: conceptualization, supervision, review & correcting, project administration, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22072136).
References
A. Agarwal, M. Rana and J. H. Park, Fuel Process. Technol., 2018, 181, 115–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Wong, R. Y. Shu, J. G. Zhang, H. C. Liu and N. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 5510–5560 RSC .
J. F. Zhang, Y. Jiang, L. F. Easterling, A. Anstner, W. R. Li, K. Z. Alzarieni, X. M. Dong, J. Bozell and H. I. Kenttämaa, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 983–1000 RSC .
J. D. Zhu, C. Y. Yan, X. Zhang, C. Yang, M. J. Jiang and X. W. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2020, 76, 100788 CrossRef .
W. Schutyser, T. Renders, S. Van den Bosch, S. F. Koelewijn, G. T. Beckham and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 852–908 RSC .
J. Sternberg, O. Sequerth and S. Pilla, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2021, 113, 101344 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukundan, D. Boffito, A. Shrotri, L. Atanda, J. Beltramini and G. Patience, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13195–13205 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Zhang and F. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 470–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sinisi, P. Pelagatti, M. Carcelli, A. Migliori, L. Mantovani, L. Righi, G. Leonardi, S. Pietarinen, C. Hubsch and D. Rogolino, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3213–3221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. N. Sun, X. L. Wang, J. L. Wen, Y. Y. Wang, X. F. Cao, T. Q. Yuan, S. F. Wang, Q. Shi and R. C. Sun, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 295, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and F. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901866 CrossRef .
X. J. Wu, S. J. Xie, H. K. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang, B. F. Sels and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2007129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Nguyen, D. P. Phan, A. Sarwar, M. H. Tran, O. K. Lee and E. Y. Lee, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 161, 113219 CrossRef CAS .
P. Figueiredo, K. Lintinen, J. T. Hirvonen, M. A. Kostiainen and H. A. Santos, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 93, 233–269 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rico-García, L. Ruiz-Rubio, L. Pérez-Alvarez, S. L. Hernández-Olmos, G. L. Guerrero-Ramírez and J. L. Vilas-Vilela, Polymers, 2020, 12, 81 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Sun, B. Fridrich, A. de Santi, S. Elangovan and K. Barta, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 614–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Kazzaz and P. Fatehi, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 154, 112732 CrossRef .
S. R. Wang, G. X. Dai, H. P. Yang and Z. Y. Luo, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 33–86 CrossRef .
M. Witzler, A. Alzagameem, M. Bergs, B. E. Khaldi-Hansen, S. E. Klein, D. Hielscher, B. Kamm, J. Kreyenschmidt, E. Tobiasch and M. Schulze, Molecules, 2018, 23, 1885 CrossRef .
N. Supanchaiyamat, K. Jetsrisuparb, J. T. N. Knijnenburg, D. C. W. Tsang and A. J. Hunt, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 272, 570–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, N. Shafiei, Z. Nezafat and N. S. S. Bidgoli, Mol. Catal., 2020, 489, 110942 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Ji, J. Y. Li, F. Y. Li, X. J. Wang, J. Man, J. F. Li, C. W. Zhang and S. X. Peng, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 281, 119078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. Ahmad, N. Ji, H. Y. Li, Q. Wu, C. F. Song, Q. L. Liu, D. G. Ma and X. B. Lu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 170, 113646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lawoko, L. Berglund and M. Johansson, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 5481–5485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Questell-Santiago, M. V. Galkin, K. Barta and J. S. Luterbacher, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 311–330 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Y. Q. Pu, A. Ragauskas and B. Yang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 271, 449–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Khan, C. Y. Lau, J. Y. Guan, C. H. Lam, J. Zhao, Y. Ji, H. M. Wang, J. L. Xu, D. J. Lee and S. Y. Leu, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 346, 126419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thakur, P. P. Govender, M. A. Mamo, S. Tamulevicius, Y. K. Mishra and V. K. Thakur, Vacuum, 2017, 146, 342–355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bertella and J. S. Luterbacher, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3459–3467 RSC .
R. C. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1–10 CrossRef .
Y. Meng, J. Lu, Y. Cheng, Q. Li and H. S. Wang, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 135, 1006–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Y. T. Jiang, X. Y. Wang, J. X. Xu and L. Hu, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s13399-021-02266-3 .
B. M. Upton and A. M. Kasko, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2275–2306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bjorkman, Sven. Papperstidn., 1956, 59, 477–485 CAS .
A. Tribot, G. Amer, M. A. Alio, H. D. Baynast, C. Delattre, A. Pons, J. D. Mathias, J. M. Callois, C. Vial, P. Michaud and C. G. Dussap, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 112, 228–240 CrossRef CAS .
E. Adler, Wood Sci. Technol., 1977, 11, 169–218 CrossRef CAS .
C. Crestini, F. Melone, M. Sette and R. Saladino, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 3928–3935 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balakshin, E. A. Capanema, X. H. Zhu, I. Sulaeva, A. Potthast, T. Rosenau and O. Rojas, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3985–4001 RSC .
C. L. Chio, M. Sain and W. S. Qin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 107, 232–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liao, N. H. Abd Latif, D. Trache, N. Brosse and M. H. Hussin, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 162, 985–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, A. Butreddy, N. Kommineni, P. G. Reddy, N. Bunekar, C. Sarkar, S. Dutt, V. K. Mishra, K. R. Aadil, Y. K. Mishra, D. Oupicky and A. Kaushik, Int. J. Nanomed., 2021, 16, 2419–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, S. H. Lee, J. Kim and C. B. Park, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2807–2827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Liu and H. Y. Chung, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 3515–3528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moreno and M. H. Sipponen, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2237–2257 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Dai, C. L. Xu, K. Wang, C. Y. Zheng and C. L. Si, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4266–4283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and M. Naebe, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 1427–1442 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Yoo, X. Z. Meng, Y. Q. Pu and A. J. Ragauskas, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 301, 122784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Li, X. C. Zhao, A. Q. Wang, G. W. Huber and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11559–11624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tana, Z. Y. Zhang, J. Beltramini, H. Y. Zhu, K. Ostrikov, J. Bartley and W. Doherty, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 861–873 RSC .
Z. H. Sun, J. L. Cheng, D. S. Wang, T. Q. Yuan, G. Y. Song and K. Barta, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5199–5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Wu, X. T. Fan, S. J. Xie, J. C. Lin, J. Cheng, Q. H. Zhang, L. Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 772–780 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, C. Zhang, D. C. W. Tsang, J. J. Fan, J. H. Clark and S. C. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 16957–16969 CrossRef CAS .
O. Y. Abdelaziz, K. Ravi, F. Mittermeier, S. Meier, A. Riisager, G. Lidén and C. P. Hulteberg, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11640–11652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ekielski and P. K. Mishra, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 63 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. L. Bai, A. Lusi, H. W. Zhang and C. X. Wan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9783–9793 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, A. W. Tricker, W. S. Yang, R. Katahira, W. Liu, T. T. Kwok, P. Gogoi and Y. L. Deng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 7719–7727 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Xu, C. Y. Li, L. Dai, C. L. Xu, Y. D. Zhong, F. X. Yu and C. L. Si, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1–13 CrossRef .
D. L. Huang, R. J. Li, P. Xu, T. Li, R. Deng, S. Chen and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Usmani, M. Sharma, P. Gupta, Y. Karpichev, N. Gathergood, R. Bhat and V. K. Gupta, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 304, 123003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, A. Ragauskas and C. X. Wan, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 147, 112241 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Jiang, N. C. Carrillo-Enríquez, H. Oguzlu, X. S. Han, R. Bi, J. N. Saddler, R. C. Sun and F. Jiang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 247, 116727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, X. Z. Meng, K. Jeong, S. Y. Li, G. Leem, K. H. Kim, Y. Q. Pu, A. J. Ragauskas and C. G. Yoo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12542–12553 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Phan and E. Y. Lee, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2020, 62, 607–630 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sivagurunathan, T. Raj, C. S. Mohanta, S. Semwal, A. Satlewal, R. P. Gupta, S. K. Puri, S. S. V. Ramakumar and R. Kumar, Chemosphere, 2021, 268, 129326 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, S. S. Chen, S. C. Zhang, Y. S. Ok, B. M. Matsagar, K. C. W. Wu and D. C. W. Tsang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 291, 121878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Cao, I. K. M. Yu, Y. Y. Liu, X. X. Ruan, D. C. W. Tsang, A. J. Hunt, Y. S. Ok, H. Song and S. C. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 269, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garedew, C. H. Lam, L. Petitjean, S. Q. Huang, B. Song, F. Lin, J. E. Jackson, C. M. Saffron and P. T. Anastas, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2868–2899 RSC .
J. C. Lin, X. J. Wu, S. J. Xie, L. Y. Chen, Q. H. Zhang, W. P. Deng and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5023–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Xiang, W. Y. Han, J. Deng, W. B. Zhu, Y. Zhang and H. L. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4199–4213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, K. Zhang, P. Liu, H. W. Han, S. Zhao, A. Kakade, A. Khan, D. L. Du and X. K. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 269, 557–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Camas and A. Ullah, Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol., 2022, 40, 102306 CrossRef .
N. L. Radhika, S. Sachdeva and M. Kumar, Fuel, 2022, 312, 122935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, D. S. Wang and L. S. Sun, Fuel, 2021, 290, 120078 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurichesse and L. Avérous, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1266–1290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Paysepar, K. T. V. Rao, Z. S. Yuan, H. F. Shui and C. B. Xu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2020, 149, 104842 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Mei, X. J. Shen, H. Z. Liu and B. X. Han, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kawamoto, J. Wood Sci., 2017, 63, 117–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Azadi, O. R. Inderwildi, R. Farnood and D. A. King, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 506–523 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Cheng, D. K. Shen, S. Gu and K. H. Luo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 6275–6296 RSC .
K. Ye, Y. Liu, S. B. Wu and J. P. Zhuang, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 172, 114008 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Wang, K. L. Zhang, H. L. Li, L. P. Xiao and G. Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Chen, D. C. Wu, P. Liu, J. Li, H. H. Xia, M. H. Zhou and J. C. Jiang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3090–3103 RSC .
D. Bourbiaux, J. J. Pu, F. Rataboul, L. Djakovitch, C. Geantet and D. Laurenti, Catal. Today, 2021, 373, 24–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Jing, L. Dong, Y. Guo, X. H. Liu and Y. Q. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4181–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Chen, P. Liu, B. K. Sharma, H. H. Xia, M. H. Zhou and J. C. Jiang, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2022, 12, 3817–3826 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Demesa, A. Laari, M. Sillanpää and T. Koiranen, Molecules, 2017, 22, 1625 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kumar, B. Biswas, K. Saini, A. Kumar, J. Kumar, B. B. Krishna and T. Bhaskar, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2022, 12, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cabral Almada, A. Kazachenko, P. Fongarland, D. Da Silva Perez, B. N. Kuznetsov and L. Djakovitch, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 467 CrossRef .
Y. Song, J. K. Mobley, A. H. Motagamwala, M. Isaacs, J. A. Dumesic, J. Ralph, A. F. Lee, K. Wilsong and M. Crocker, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8127–8133 RSC .
Z. R. Zhang, J. L. Song and B. X. Han, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6834–6880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Hemmilä, R. Hosseinpourpia, S. Adamopoulos and A. Eceiza, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2020, 11, 5835–5845 CrossRef .
J. A. Okolie, R. Rana, S. Nanda, A. K. Dalai and J. A. Kozinski, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 578–598 RSC .
S. Suresh, V. Viswanathan, M. Angamuthu, G. P. Dhakshinamoorthy, K. P. Gopinath and A. Bhatnagar, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s13399-021-01497-8 .
Y. Han, F. Chen, T. Z. Ma, H. Gong, K. W. A. Al-Shwafy, W. Li, J. L. Zhang and M. H. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 23014–23024 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Cao, I. K. M. Yu, X. Xiong, D. C. W. Tsang, S. Zhang, J. H. Clark, C. W. Hu, Y. H. Ng, J. Shang and Y. S. Ok, Environ. Res., 2020, 186, 109547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Cao, Y. P. Xie, Y. Chen, J. Lu, J. W. Shi, H. Jin, S. Wang and L. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 7033–7042 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Yu, R. Zhang, C. Q. Cao, L. J. Liu, J. B. Fang and H. Jin, Fuel, 2022, 319, 123744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Li, B. N. Xu, H. H. Jin, K. Luo and J. R. Fan, Fuel Process. Technol., 2019, 192, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yuan, H. Li, L. P. Xiao, T. P. Wang, W. F. Ren, Q. Lu and R. C. Sun, Fuel, 2022, 319, 123758 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, J. L. Xu, Z. Q. Ma, Y. Y. Yang, B. L. Zhou, C. L. Wu, J. W. Ye, C. Zhao, X. H. Liu, D. Y. Chen and W. B. Zhang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2021, 216, 106792 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Zhou, B. K. Sharma, P. Liu, J. Ye, J. M. Xu and J. C. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6867–6875 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molinoa, V. Larocca, V. Valerio, J. Rimauro, T. Marino, P. Casella, A. Cerbone, G. Arcieri and E. Viola, Fuel, 2018, 221, 513–517 CrossRef .
X. Du, H. C. Zhang, K. P. Sullivan, P. Gogoi and Y. L. Deng, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4318–4343 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bawareth, D. Di Marino, T. A. Nijhuis and M. Wessling, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7565–7573 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Lan, H. X. Fan, Y. Y. Shang, D. Y. Shen and G. Li, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1828–1836 RSC .
D. Di Marino, T. Jestel, C. Marks, J. Viell, M. Blindert, S. M. A. Kriescher, A. C. Spiess and M. Wessling, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1434–1442 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, S. Maldonado and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 10104–10114 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, J. van der Zalm, S. S. Thind and A. C. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 872, 114528 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bateni, R. Ghahremani and J. A. Staser, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2021, 51, 65–78 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rauber, T. K. F. Dier, D. A. Volmer and R. Hempelmann, Z. Phys. Chem., 2017, 232, 189–208 CrossRef .
D. Di Marino, D. Stöckmann, S. Kriescher, S. Stiefel and M. Wessling, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 6021–6028 RSC .
Y. P. Wijaya, K. J. Smith, C. S. Kim and E. L. Gyenge, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7233–7264 RSC .
Y. P. Wijaya, K. J. Smith, C. S. Kim and E. L. Gyenge, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2021, 51, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, T. Peng, C. X. Yang, B. Y. Liang, H. N. Chen, M. Kumar, Y. Zhang and W. Zhao, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 142–146 RSC .
X. J. Wu, N. C. Luo, S. J. Xie, H. K. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .
J. Xu, M. Li, J. H. Qiu, X. F. Zhang and J. F. Yao, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 180, 403–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoo, M. W. Lee, S. Lee, J. Lee, S. Cho, H. Lee, H. G. Cha and H. S. Kim, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8465–8475 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wu, S. J. Xie, C. X. Liu, C. Zhou, J. C. Lin, J. C. Kang, Q. H. Zhang, Z. H. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8443–8451 CrossRef CAS .
N. Srisasiwimon, S. Chuangchote, N. Laosiripojana and T. Sagawa, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 13968–13976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma, S. Kumar, S. M. Arumugam and S. Elumalai, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 602, 117730 CrossRef CAS .
L. Serrano, J. A. Cecilia, C. García-Sancho and A. García, Top. Curr. Chem., 2019, 377, 26 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Yaguchi, S. J. Lee and M. A. Blenner, Trends Biotechnol., 2021, 39, 1037–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Weng, X. W. Peng and Y. J. Han, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2021, 14, 84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Silva, A. R. P. Ticona, P. R. V. Hamann, B. F. Quirino and E. F. Noronha, Molecules, 2021, 26, 2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Mei, X. B. Shen, L. P. Gang, H. J. Xu, F. F. Wu and L. Q. Sheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 310, 123445 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bartolomei, Y. Le Brech, R. Gadiou, F. Bertaud, S. Leclerc, L. Vidal, J. M. Le Meins and A. Dufour, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 17769–17783 CrossRef CAS .
T. Phongpreecha, N. C. Hool, R. J. Stoklosa, A. S. Klett, C. E. Foster, A. Bhalla, D. Holmes, M. C. Thiesc and D. B. Hodge, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5131–5143 RSC .
B. Wang, T. Y. Chen, H. M. Wang, H. Y. Li, C. F. Liu and J. L. Wen, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 107, 426–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Kim, K. Jeong, J. S. Zhuang, H. J. Jeong, C. S. Kim, B. Koo and C. G. Yoo, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 159, 113095 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, H. Zhang, Z. D. Zhu and S. Y. Fu, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 152, 775–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. M. Aini, N. Othman, M. H. Hussin, K. Sahakaro and N. Hayeemasae, Processes, 2019, 7, 315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, M. H. Tran and E. Y. Lee, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2022, 80, 1225–1234 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Q. Q. Sun, X. K. Zhao, S. L. Cao, D. She and R. C. Sun, J. For. Eng., 2017, 2, 90–96 CrossRef .
N. E. El Mansouri, Q. L. Yuan and F. R. Huang, BioResources, 2018, 13, 8061–8075 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Du, J. B. Li and M. E. Lindström, Ind. Crops Prod., 2014, 52, 729–735 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, G. Sun and T. Zhao, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2013, 59, 221–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Ott, C. Dietz, S. Trosien, S. Mehlhase, M. J. Bitsch, M. Nau, T. Meckel, A. Geissler, G. Siegert, J. Huong, B. Hertel, R. W. Stark and M. Biesalski, Holzforschung, 2021, 75, 390–398 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Gao, J. P. W. Inwood and P. Fatehi, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2019, 39, 225–241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, J. G. Jiang, Y. Wang, B. Wang, T. Q. Yuan, Q. Shi, X. P. Liao, B. Shi and R. C. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 9053–9061 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ying, G. F. Xu, H. Y. Yang, Z. J. Shi and J. Yang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 286, 121392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aro and P. Fatehi, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1861–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Hopa and P. Fatehi, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Zhang, D. J. Yang, H. Wang, Y. Qian, J. H. Huang, L. X. Yu and X. Q. Qiu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1120–1128 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. He and P. Fatehi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 47031–47039 RSC .
J. R. Li, H. Li, Z. Yuan, J. Fang, L. F. Chang, H. Y. Zhang and C. L. Li, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 135, 1171–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Huang, J. M. Ma, W. Y. Zhang, G. H. Huang and Q. Yong, Polymers, 2018, 10, 841 CrossRef PubMed .
F. D. Zhang, X. Jiang, J. Lin, G. J. Zhao, H. M. Chang and H. Jameel, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 2238–2246 RSC .
X. Jiang, J. Liu, X. Du, Z. Hu, H. Chang and H. Jameel, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5504–5512 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Li, L. L. Shi, C. Wang, F. X. Yue and F. C. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5549–5555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Podschun, B. Saake and R. Lehnen, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 67, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Tran, Y. Ko, S. Kim, J. Moon, J. W. Choi, K. H. Kim, C. S. Kim, J. M. Ha, H. Kim, K. Jeong, H. Lee and C. J. Yoo, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 2051–2061 RSC .
A. Adjaoud, R. Dieden and P. Verge, Polymers, 2021, 13, 637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Zhao, Y. J. Zhang, M. Yang, Z. Q. Huang, H. Y. Hu, A. M. Huang and Z. F. Feng, Polymers, 2018, 10, 907 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Zhao, Y. J. Zhang, L. P. Wei, H. Y. Hu, Z. Q. Huang, M. Yang, A. M. Huang, J. Wu and Z. F. Feng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 52382–52390 RSC .
L. Y. Liu, S. W. Chen, L. Ji, S. K. Jang and S. Renneckar, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4567–4579 RSC .
S. P. Luo, J. Z. Cao and A. G. McDonald, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 97, 281–291 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Ang, Z. Ashaari, S. H. Lee, P. M. Tahir and R. Halis, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2019, 95, 102408 CrossRef .
B. Venkatesagowda and R. F. H. Dekker, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2021, 147, 109780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sawamura, Y. Tobimatsu, H. Kamitakahara and T. Takano, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5424–5431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Podschun, B. Saake and R. Lehnen, React. Funct. Polym., 2017, 119, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .
B. Venkatesagowda and R. F. H. Dekker, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2020, 10, 203–225 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. D. Zhao and J. B. Li, Holzforschung, 2018, 72, 357–365 CAS .
D. Kai, K. Y. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Z. Wong, Z. B. Li, Z. Zhang and X. J. Loh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6016–6025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grossman and W. Vermerris, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2019, 56, 112–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Y. Q. Yang and J. L. Song, J. Cellul. Sci. Technol., 2018, 26, 76–85 CAS .
G. F. Qin, Y. H. Liu, F. Yin, X. Hu, N. Zhu and K. Guo, Prog. Chem., 2020, 32, 1547–1556 Search PubMed .
D. Kai, H. M. Chong, L. P. Chow, L. Jiang, Q. Lin, K. Y. Zhang, H. J. Zhang, Z. Zhang and X. J. Loh, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 158, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Q. Pu, F. Chen and A. J. Ragauskas, New Biotechnol., 2021, 60, 189–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kai, Z. W. Low, S. S. Liow, A. A. Karim, H. Y. Ye, G. R. Jin, K. Li and X. J. Loh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2160–2169 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zaborniak, P. Chmielarz and K. Matyjaszewski, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 120, 109253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdollahi, M. Mohsenpour, S. A. Mousavian and A. Varamesh, Wood Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 1569–1585 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Taverna, F. Felissia, M. C. Area, D. A. Estenoz and V. V. Nicolau, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47712 CrossRef .
M. Kollman, X. Jiang, S. J. Thompson, O. Mante, D. C. Dayton, H. M. Chang and H. Jameel, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7122–7136 RSC .
N. N. Guo, M. Li, X. K. Sun, F. Wang and R. Yang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2595–2602 RSC .
H. Y. Liu, T. Xu, K. Liu, M. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Li, H. S. Du and C. L. Si, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 165, 113425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. D. Jiao, M. Liao, B. J. Wang and H. S. Peng, Carbon, 2017, 124, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ghimbeu, B. Zhang, A. M. de Yuso, B. Réty and J. M. Tarascon, Carbon, 2019, 153, 634–647 CrossRef .
C. H. Li, Y. Sun, Q. J. Wu, X. Liang, C. H. Chen and H. F. Xiang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6078–6081 RSC .
Y. B. Xi, D. J. Yang, W. F. Liu, Y. L. Qin and X. Q. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 303, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Choi, J. N. Lee, J. C. Song, P. H. Kang, J. K. Park and Y. M. Lee, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 2471–2475 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Shi, G. Q. Jin, J. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 795, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Ma, A. L. Smirnova and H. Fong, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2019, 241, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Xi, S. Huang, D. J. Yang, X. Q. Qiu, H. J. Su, C. H. Yi and Q. Li, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4321–4330 RSC .
M. Danish and T. Ahmad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 87, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, L. L. Du, W. Wu, H. L. Xu, G. Z. Zhang, S. Li, C. Y. Wang, Z. G. Lu and Y. H. Deng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12621–12629 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wu, J. H. Jiang, C. G. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Q. Pu, A. Ragauskas, S. Li and B. Yang, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2020, 14, 650–672 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Q. L. Zhang, J. Pan, J. G. Xu, Y. Y. Liu, M. Al-Shroofy and Y. T. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32341–32348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, K. Chen, J. Ma, G. J. Xu, S. M. Dong, B. B. Chen, J. D. Li, Z. Chen, X. H. Zhou and G. L. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 273–280 RSC .
H. M. Zhang, W. F. Zhang, H. Ming, J. Pang, H. Zhang, G. P. Cao and Y. S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 341, 280–288 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Susanti, S. Alvin and J. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2020, 91, 317–329 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lin, Y. Z. Liu, H. Tan and B. Zhang, Carbon, 2020, 157, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
E. Irisarri, N. Amini, S. Tennison, C. Ghimbeu Matei, J. Gorka, C. Vix-Guterl, A. Ponrouch and M. R. Palacin, J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 165, A4058–A4066 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Fu, D. J. Yang, W. L. Zhang, H. Wang and X. Q. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123721 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. P. Cao, H. Zheng, D. Xu, H. Y. Guo, S. M. Wang, Y. Li and J. H. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12831–12841 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Garcia-Mateos, R. Ruiz-Rosas, J. M. Rosas, E. Morallon, D. Cazorla-Amoros, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 241, 116724 CrossRef CAS .
E. Svinterikos, I. Zuburtikudis and M. Al-Marzouqi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13868–13893 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. H. Zhao, S. Q. Liu, P. C. Li, D. Yuan and C. B. He, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 297, 109960 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fang, S. Yang, X. L. Wang, T. Q. Yuan and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1794–1827 RSC .
Z. Y. Peng, Y. B. Zou, S. Q. Xu, W. B. Zhong and W. T. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22190–22200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Li, X. L. Wang and R. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20643–20650 RSC .
T. Liu, X. L. Ren, J. M. Zhang, J. Liu, R. X. Ou, C. G. Guo, X. Y. Yu, Q. W. Wang and Z. Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227532 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Cheng, J. Pan, Y. Zhao, M. Liao and H. S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702184 CrossRef .
H. L. Liu, L. Mulderrig, D. Hallinan and H. Y. Chung, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, 42, 2000428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Li, X. C. Zhang, M. Sang, X. Wang, D. Y. Zuo, J. Xu and H. W. Zhang, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 33, 101931 CrossRef .
G. B. Zhou, L. Y. Yang, W. J. Li, C. Y. Chen and Q. Liu, iScience, 2020, 23, 101502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, H. H. Rana, J. Y. Lee and H. S. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16962–16968 RSC .
L. J. Wu, S. Q. Huang, J. Zheng, Z. J. Qiu, X. L. Lin and Y. L. Qin, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 140, 538–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, C. Yeom and Y. Kim, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 33, 1855–1859 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, C. L. Jiang, B. X. Hou, Y. Y. Wang, C. Hao and J. B. Wu, Chemosphere, 2018, 206, 587–596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhu, J. Xu, Y. S. Kuang, Z. Cheng, Q. Q. Wu, J. X. Xie, B. Wang, W. H. Gao, J. S. Zeng, J. Li and K. F. Chen, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 159, 113071 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Meng, B. Scheidemantle, M. Li, Y. Y. Wang, X. H. Zhao, M. Toro-González, P. Singh, Y. Q. Pu, C. E. Wyman, S. Ozcan, C. M. Cai and A. J. Ragauskas, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 2865–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Domínguez-Robles, M. S. Peresin, T. Tamminen, A. Rodríguez, E. Larrañeta and A. S. Jääskeläinen, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 115, 1249–1259 CrossRef .
Z. Z. Yang, R. Gleisner, D. H. Mann, J. M. Xu, J. C. Jiang and J. Y. Zhu, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Chen, X. Hu, X. H. Tu, L. F. Chen, X. Liu, L. L. Tan, Y. L. Mao, J. W. Shi, X. X. Teng, S. H. He, Z. H. Qin, J. H. Xu and J. Wu, Polymers, 2020, 12, 797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Jiang, X. H. Wang, B. X. Hou, C. Hao, X. Li and J. B. Wu, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2020, 68, 3050–3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Mohammadabadi and V. Javanbakht, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 164, 1133–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. L. Wen, S. L. Sun, H. M. Wang, S. F. Wang, Q. Y. Liu, A. Charlton and R. C. Sun, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 108, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Ge, L. Qin and Z. L. Li, Mater. Des., 2016, 95, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Popovic, J. D. Rusmirovic, Z. Velickovic, Z. Radovanovic, M. Ristic, V. P. Pavlovic and A. D. Marinkovic, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 156, 1160–1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Ge and Z. L. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7181–7192 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Shi, C. Wang, B. B. Dong, S. F. Kong, R. Das, D. Pan and Z. H. Guo, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 161, 147–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhu, J. Xu, Z. Cheng, Y. S. Kuang, Q. Q. Wu, B. Wang, W. H. Gao, J. S. Zeng, J. Li and K. F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118732 CrossRef .
Z. H. Ma, X. Y. Xing, Z. Qu, Y. Sun, G. W. Sun, X. Wang and Y. Han, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 164, 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sandouqa, Z. Al-Hamamre and J. Asfar, Renewable Energy, 2019, 132, 667–682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, G. B. Sima, Y. Cui, L. J. Chang and L. H. Gan, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2020, 28, 1866–1874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Zhu, Z. J. Li and J. Z. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2019, 4, 210–244 CrossRef .
A. Rusanen, R. Kupila, K. Lappalainen, J. Kärkkäinen, T. Hu and U. Lassi, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 821 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kupila, K. Lappalainen, T. Hu, H. Romar and U. Lassi, Appl. Catal., A, 2021, 612, 118011 CrossRef CAS .
I. U. Din, M. S. Shaharun, A. Naeem, M. A. Alotaibi, A. I. Alharthi, M. A. Bakht and Q. Nasir, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 18446–18452 CrossRef .
B. Y. Du, C. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Han, Y. Z. Guo, H. M. Li and J. H. Zhou, Renewable Energy, 2020, 147, 1331–1339 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Li, Y. H. Lv and D. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 569, 110–118 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, L. Jiao, X. Wang, W. B. Wu, H. L. Lian and H. Q. Dai, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 166, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kalami, M. Arefmanesh, E. Master and M. Nejad, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45124 CrossRef .
M. Österberg, M. H. Sipponen, B. D. Mattos and O. J. Rojas, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2712–2733 RSC .
N. A. Aziz, A. F. A. Latip, L. C. Peng, N. H. A. Latif, N. Brosse, R. Hashim and M. H. Hussin, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 141, 185–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Zhang, N. Li, Z. K. Chen, C. Ding, Q. Zheng, J. D. Xu and Q. L. Meng, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Paananen, L. Alvila and T. T. Pakkanen, Sustainable Chem. Pharm., 2021, 20, 100376 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pang, S. Yang, W. Fang, T. Q. Yuan, D. S. Argyropoulos and R. C. Sun, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 108, 316–326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalami, N. S. Chen, H. Borazjani and M. Nejad, Ind. Crops Prod., 2018, 125, 520–528 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Gao, X. L. Lang, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 18385–18395 CrossRef CAS .
P. Solt, B. Rößiger, J. Konnerth and H. W. G. Van Herwijnen, Polymers, 2018, 10, 1162 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, T. L. Eberhardt, C. P. Wang, S. S. Gao and H. Pan, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alinejad, C. Henry, S. Nikafshar, A. Gondaliya, S. Bagheri, N. S. Chen, S. K. Singh, D. B. Hodge and M. Nejad, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, S. Y. Fu and H. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 585, 124164 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Gadhave, P. S. Kasbe, P. A. Mahanwar and P. T. Gadekar, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2019, 95, 102427 CrossRef CAS .
P. Figueiredo, K. Lintinen, A. Kiriazis, V. Hynninen, Z. H. Liu, T. Bauleth-Ramos, A. Rahikkala, A. Correia, T. Kohout, B. Sarmento, J. Yli-Kauhaluoma, J. Hirvonen, O. Ikkala, M. A. Kostiainen and H. A. Santos, Biomaterials, 2017, 121, 97–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Larrañeta, M. Imízcoz, J. X. Toh, N. J. Irwin, A. Ripolin, A. Perminova, J. Dominguez-Robles, A. Rodríguez and R. F. Donnelly, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9037–9046 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. M. Han, G. Y. Li, S. Yang and F. X. Chu, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shu, B. Jiang, Y. F. Yuan, M. H. Li, W. J. Wu, Y. C. Jin and H. N. Xiao, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 4905–4918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iravani and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 612–636 RSC .
L. H. Chen, X. Y. Zhou, Y. F. Shi, B. Gao, J. P. Wu, T. B. Kirk, J. K. Xu and W. Xue, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 346, 217–225 CrossRef CAS .
L. Siddiqui, J. Bag, Seetha, D. Mittal, A. Leekha, H. Mishra, M. Mishra, A. K. Verma, P. K. Mishra, A. Ekielski, Z. Iqbal and S. Talegaonkar, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 152, 786–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Sipponen, H. Lange, C. Crestini, A. Henn and M. Österberg, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2039–2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Han, G. Li, S. Yang, F. Xiong and F. Chu, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Alqahtani, A. Alqahtani, A. Al-Thabit, M. Roni and R. Syed, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 4461–4473 RSC .
X. H. Wang, Z. L. Zhou, X. W. Guo, Q. He, C. Hao and C. W. Ge, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35550–35558 RSC .
W. Farhat, R. Venditti, N. Mignard, M. Taha, F. Becquart and A. Ayoub, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 104, 564–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhang, M. M. Jiang, Y. Q. Zhang, Q. P. Cao, X. Wang, Y. Han, G. W. Sun, Y. Li and J. H. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 110002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jaiswal, S. Shankar, J. W. Rhim and D. H. Hahm, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 159, 859–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhang, B. Yuan, Y. Q. Zhang, Q. P. Cao, C. Yang, Y. Li and J. H. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125984 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abudula, K. Gauthaman, A. Mostafavi, A. Alshahrie, N. Salah, P. Morganti, A. Chianese, A. Tamayol and A. Memic, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 20428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ravishankar, M. Venkatesan, R. P. Desingh, A. Mahalingam, B. Sadhasivam, R. Subramaniyam and R. Dhamodharan, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 102, 447–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, H. Yang, J. Yang, M. Peng and J. Hu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 146, 427–434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Deng, F. X. Chen, H. D. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. P. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52333–52345 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ullaha, Z. B. Chen, Y. X. Xie, S. S. Khan, S. Singh, C. Y. Yu and G. Cheng, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 208, 819–832 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Rejmontová, A. Kovalcik, P. Humpolíček, Z. Capáková, E. Wrzecionko and P. Sáha, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 12346–12353 RSC .
X. Zhang, M. Morits, C. Jonkergouw, A. Ora, J. J. Valle-Delgado, M. Farooq, R. Ajdary, S. Q. Huan, M. Linder, O. Rojas, M. H. Sipponen and M. Österberg, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 1875–1885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Saudi, S. Amini, N. Amirpour, M. Kazemi, A. Z. Kharazi, H. Salehi and M. Rafienia, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 110005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. L. Tian, B. W. Luo, S. Ramakrishna, D. Kai, X. J. Loh, I. H. Yang, G. R. Deen and X. M. Mo, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 169, 356–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. F. Liu, W. Q. Liu and X. Q. Qiu, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 142, 551–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Crouvisier-Urion, F. Regina da Silva Farias, S. Arunatat, D. Griffin, M. Gerometta, J. R. Rocca-Smith, G. Weber, N. Sok and T. Karbowiak, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4633–4641 RSC .
H. M. Wang, T. Q. Yuan, G. Y. Song and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3790–3817 RSC .
N. Izaguirre, O. Gordobil, E. Robles and J. Labidi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 155, 447–455 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shankar, J. W. Rhim and K. Won, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 107, 1724–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Sirviö, M. Y. Ismail, K. Zhang, M. V. Tejesvi and A. Ämmälä, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7935–7946 RSC .
J. W. Rhim, H. M. Park and C. S. Ha, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1629–1652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tian, J. G. Hu, J. Bao, R. P. Chandra, J. N. Saddler and C. H. Lu, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2017, 10, 192 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, J. S. Owczarek, E. Fortunati, M. Kozanecki, A. Mazzaglia, G. M. Balestra, J. M. Kenny, L. Torre and D. Puglia, Ind. Crops Prod., 2016, 94, 800–811 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Li, F. Li, Y. Yang, B. C. Ge and F. Z. Meng, J. Polym. Eng., 2021, 41, 245–258 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, S. Y. Lü, J. Yan, X. Bai, C. M. Gao and M. Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10941–10950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Sipponen, O. J. Rojas, V. Pihlajaniemi, K. Lintinen and M. Österberg, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1054–1061 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Wang, X. J. Chen, L. D. Zhang, Z. H. Li, X. L. Fan and S. L. Sun, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 166, 113481 CrossRef CAS .
D. Legras-Lecarpentier, K. Stadler, R. Weiss, G. M. Guebitz and G. S. Nyanhongo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12621–12628 CAS .
G. J. Jiao, P. Peng, S. L. Sun, Z. C. Geng and D. She, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 127, 544–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Li, M. Wang, D. She and Y. D. Zhao, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 109, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, X. L. Fan, L. D. Zhang, X. J. Chen, S. L. Sun and R. C. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4356–4366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Naz and S. A. Sulaiman, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 225, 109–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Lu, M. Y. Cheng, C. Zhao, B. Li, H. H. Peng, Y. J. Zhang, Q. J. Shao and M. Hassan, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 176, 114267 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Elhassani, Y. Essamlali, M. Aqlil, A. M. Nzenguet, I. Ganetri and M. Zahouily, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2019, 15, 100403 CrossRef .
W. J. Mulder, R. J. A. Gosselink, M. H. Vingerhoeds, P. F. H. Harmsen and D. Eastham, Ind. Crops Prod., 2011, 34, 915–920 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, M. Li and M. Whelan, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 612, 522–537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fertahi, I. Bertrand, M. B. Amjoud, A. Oukarroum, M. Arji and A. Barakat, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10371–10382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fertahi, I. Bertrand, M. Ilsouk, A. Oukarroum, M. B. Amjoud, Y. Zeroual and A. Barakat, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 143, 153–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Wang, X. Q. Liu, J. Y. Zhang, W. J. Sui, J. Jang and C. L. Si, Ind. Crops Prod., 2018, 124, 216–225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, M. Li, C. J. Zhu, Y. Q. Hu, T. Shen, M. Y. Li, X. X. Jia, G. J. Lyu and W. Zhuang, Composites, Part B, 2021, 205, 108530 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Li, Y. H. Yin, S. B. Wu, H. Ma and F. S. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 317, 124034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Li, H. Ma, S. B. Wu and Y. H. Yin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 207, 112551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. Heo and J. W. Choi, Fuel, 2018, 232, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bertella and J. S. Luterbacher, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 440–453 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Lourençon, S. Alakurtti, T. Virtanen, A. S. Jääskeläinen, T. Liitiä, M. Hughes, W. L. E. Magalhães, G. I. B. Muniz and T. Tamminen, Holzforschung, 2020, 74, 175–183 Search PubMed .
J. S. Chen, L. L. An, J. W. Heo, J. H. Bae, H. Jeong and Y. S. Kim, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2022, 42, 114–124 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Zhou, F. G. Chen, H. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2017, 37, 323–333 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. He, Y. Q. Zhang and P. Fatehi, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 503, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orebom, D. Di Francesco, P. Shakari, J. S. M. Samec and C. Pierrou, Molecules, 2021, 26, 3219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Poveda-Giraldo, J. C. Solarte-Toro and C. A. Cardona Alzate, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 138, 110688 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Kazzaz, Z. H. Feizi and P. Fatehi, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5714–5752 RSC .

          M. Weber, M. Weber and V. Weber, Ullmann's Encycl. Ind. Chem,  2020 Search PubMed .
N. N. Zhou, W. P. D. W. Thilakarathna, Q. S. He and H. P. V. Rupasinghe, Front. Energy Res., 2022, 9, 758744 CrossRef .
T. Peijs, R. Kirschbaum and P. J. Lemstra, Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res., 2022, 5, 90–106 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Mei Jiao Gan	Mei Jiao Gan is currently a researcher in the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She also works for Zhejiang Academy of Forestry, Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Applied Chemistry from Zhejiang International Studies University. Her research presently centers on lignin chemistry and advanced dolomite-based catalysts for the catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass. She has also been studying the quality and safety of bamboo and wood products.
Yu Qin Niu	Yu Qin Niu is currently a postgraduate at the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Qingdao University of Science and Technology. Her research presently focuses on organic–inorganic-composite and biomaterials, interfacial chemistry of biochemicals and inorganic minerals under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. She has coauthored several scientific papers in international peer-reviewed international journals, including a recent one published in the journal Chemical Society Reviews (2022, 51, 7883–7943. Impact Factor: 60.615).
Xue Jing Qu	Xue Jing Qu is currently a researcher at the Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Xinyang Normal University. Her research presently centers on the surface interactions between biochemicals and inorganic minerals, biomineralization, inorganic–organic-composites and biomaterials under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou.
Chun Hui Zhou	Dr Chun Hui Zhou, was born and raised in Miaoqian, Qingyang, Anhui, and is a Professor of Chemical Engineering and Leader of the Research Group for Advanced Materials and Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), Zhejiang University of Technology. He is the Director of the Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals. He acts as AIPEA Vice President (2022–2025) & Chair ICC Advisory Committee, and AIPEA Councilor (2017–2022). He also serves as the Principal Editor of Clay Minerals, Associate Editor of Clays and Clay Minerals, and Editorial Member of Applied Clay Science (Elsevier), Journal of Porous Materials (Springer) and Materials Research Innovations (Taylor and Francis). He worked as a Visiting Academician at the University of Queensland (2006–2007) and as a Visiting Professor at the University of Western Australia (2010). His R&D centers on the catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass, applied clay mineralogy, limestone and dolomite, and functional biomass-/mineral-based materials. He teaches catalysis, materials science and engineering, and scientific literacy.

 	Fig. 1  Structure and linkages of lignin. (a) Biosynthetic pathways for monolignol monomers. (b) Typical structure of lignin. Color: showing different types of chemical bonds. (c) Approximate amount of major chemical linkages in softwood lignin and hardwood lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

Kraft lignin	1.0–3.0	0.5–3.0	<25000	2.5–4	108–165	Alkali; organic solvents	4.1	2.6	14	90	260–500
Lignosulfonate	3.5–8.0	4.5–8.0	<15000	4.2–9.0	127–154	Water	No data	No data	No data	1000	180–500
Soda lignin	0	0.7–2.3	<15000	2.5–3.5	150–155	Alkali	7.2–13.6	2.6–5.1	10–16	5–10	200–300
Organosolv lignin	0	∼1.7	<5000	1.5–2.4	89–97	Organic solvents	3.6–7.7	3.4–3.7	15.1–19	3	280–520

 	Fig. 2  Brief summary of the degradation of lignin to chemicals and fuels.	 

Pyrolysis	Hydrolysis lignin	Zeolite X	400–800 °C	Bio-oil yield: 50.5%	—	
75

Pyrolysis	Mild acidolysis lignin from corn stalk and bamboo	—	500 °C	4-Vinyl-phenol as the main pyrolysis product	Cleavage of C–O bonds coupling with decarboxylation reaction	
99

Pyrolysis	Milled wood lignin	Zeolite catalysts	850 °C; catalyst-to-lignin ratio: 3:1	Bio-BTX with the highest selective yield: 56.56%	—	
100

Hydrogenolysis	Catechyl lignin	Atomically dispersed Ru catalyst	200 °C; 3 MPa of H2; in MeOH; 4 h	A selectivity to propenylcatechol: 77%	Cleavage of C–O bonds in benzodioxane linkages	
81

Hydrogenolysis	Sodium lignosulfonate	Ni3S2–CS catalysts	Catalytic hydrogenolysis of lignin model compounds; 260 °C; 2.0 MPa of N2; in iPrOH; 4 h	Ethylbenzene yield: 92%; phenol yield: 86%	Cleavage of C–O bonds in lignin	
82

Hydrogenolysis	Alkaline lignin, dealkaline lignin, lignosulfonate	CuNiAl-based catalysts	140 or 160 °C; 80 min; in methanol; 60 °C or 180 °C; 80 min; in ethanol or isopropanol	Bio-oil with higher heating value and decreased molecular weights	Cleavage of C–O bonds in alkaline lignin, dealkaline lignin, and lignosulfonate	
85

Hydrogenolysis	Alkali lignin	CuNiAl hydrotalcite-based catalyst	290 °C; 3 h; in ethanol–phenol solvent; phenol/lignin ratio: 0.8	Bio-oil yield: up to 81.8%; higher heating value: about 30 MJ kg−1	Cleavage of ether bonds in alkali lignin	
101

Oxidation	Alkali lignin	Phosphotungstic acid and phosphomolybdic acid	Phosphomolybdic acid: 200 °C; 60 min; oxygen partial pressure: 10 bar; phosphotungstic acid: 175 °C; 60 min; oxygen partial pressure: 10 bar	Carboxylic acids yield: up to 45%	—	
86

Oxidation	Protobind™ 1000 lignin	Cu/γ-Al2O3, Mn/γ-Al2O3, and Cu–Mn/γ-Al2O3	1 g of prot lignin; 10 g solvent (water or water/ethanol (wt/wt)); 100 mg of catalysts; in the presence of molecular oxygen	Bio-oil yield: 74.3 wt% in 50 wt% ethanol–50 wt% water (Cu/γ-Al2O3)	Selective breaking of β-O-4 and C–C (α–β) bonds	
87

Oxidation	Kraft lignin, and γ-valerolactone extracted lignin	Au/Li–Al LDH	120 °C; 1 atm; 24 h; O2: 10 mL min−1	Yield of monomers (vanillin, vanillic acid, ferulic acid, and coniferyl alcohol): 40 wt%	—	
89

Oxidation	Kraft lignin	Au/TiO2 and Pt/TiO2	150 °C; Pair: 20 bar; CNaOH: 10 g L−1; 1 h	Aromatics: vanillic acid, vanillin and syringaldehyde	—	
88

Gasification	Lignin from Arundo donax	—	550 °C; 250 bar; feed flow rate of 10–60 mL min−1; in the supercritical water	Syngas with hydrogen and methane; a higher heating value greater than 40 MJ kg−1; liquid bio-products with glucose and aldehydes	—	
102

Gasification	Dealkaline lignin	CuO–ZnO	600 °C; 1 g of lignin; 0.5 g of catalyst; 9 g of ultrapure water	Hydrogen yield: 29.62 mol kg−1	—	
96

Gasification	Dealkaline lignin	Ni/3A, Ni/4A, Ni/5A, Ni/13X, and Ni/ZSM-5	450 °C; 30 min; 0.65 g of lignin; 12.35 g of water	Hydrogen selectivity: 42.61%; hydrogen yield: 5.63 mol kg−1	—	
97


 	Fig. 3  Electrocatalytic hydrogenation–hydrogenolysis of guaiacol. Adapted and Reprinted with permission from [Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH]: [Springer Nature] [ref. 113], [copyright] (2020).	 

 	Fig. 4  Two types of photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in lignin. (a) Two holes/electrons process. (b) One hole/electron process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocatalytic degradation of organosolv lignin over Zn4In2S7-based photocatalyst. (a) Schematic of the photocatalytic route. (b) Possible routes to break the Cβ–O bond. GO: graphene oxide; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; and ZIS-100: photocatalyst prepared by adding 100 μL of graphene oxide to the solution. Reprinted from ref. 116, copyright (2021), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocatalytic conversion of lignin in birch woodmeal over CdS QD catalysts. Reprinted by permission from [Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH]: [Springer Nature] [ref. 51], [copyright] (2018).	 

 	Fig. 7  Catalytic mechanism of lignin degradation mediated by enzymes. (a) Laccase. (b) Lignin peroxidase. (c) Manganese peroxidase. (d) Versatile peroxidase. Reprinted from ref. 123 with permission from Springer Nature under the terms of the Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license, copyright (2021).	 

 	Fig. 8  Summary of the functionalization strategies for lignin.	 

 	Fig. 9  One-pot route to produce esterified lignin derivatives with subsequent downward precipitation fractionation. F1: fraction 1; F2: lignin fraction 2; F3: lignin fraction 3; F4: lignin fraction 4; F5: lignin fraction 5; and HELignin: hydroxyethyl lignin. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence, copyright 2021.	 

Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin	Porous lignin-derived carbon/carbon nanotube composites	Hydrophobic self-assembly, and carbonization	Anode material for lithium-ion batteries	Reversible specific capacity: 614 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles	
179

Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin	Hierarchical lignin-derived porous carbon	Gas-exfoliation and in situ templating technology	Anode material for lithium-ion batteries	Volume/mass energy density: 730 mA h cm−3/550 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2 A g−1; cycle performance: ∼99% retention at 1.0 A g−1 after 10000 cycles	
183

Lignin (molecular weight = 10000)	Lignin-based mesoporous carbonized nanofibers	Electrospinning technique and thermal treatment	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	Reversible capacity: 384.4 mA h g−1 at 1.0 mA g−1; cycle performance: capacity retention of 89.2% at 1.0 A g−1 after 400 cycles; discharge capacity:127.7 mA h g−1 at 5.0 A g−1	
181

Alkali lignin	Lignin-derived water-soluble binder	Free radical graft copolymerization, and alkaline hydrolysis	Micro silicon anode for lithium-ion batteries	Specific capacity: 1914 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 840 mA g−1; initial coulombic efficiency: 91.0%	
185

Lignin (molecular weight = 10000)	Biomass-based lignin binder	Dispersing lignin in alkaline water	Cathode for 5 V lithium-ion batteries	Capacity value: 110.8 mA h g−1 at a 1C rate after 1000 cycles; overall coulombic efficiency: 99.5% after 1000 cycles	
188

Kraft lignin	Binder and conductive additive	Low-temperature heat treatment	Silicon nanoparticle electrodes for lithium-ion batteries	Initial discharge capacity: up to 3086 mA h g−1 and retaining 2378 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1 A g−1	
187

Lignin kraft and lignin sulphonate	Lignin-derived hard carbon	Thermal annealing, washing and thermal treatment procedure	Anode for Na-ion batteries	Reversible capacity: 284 mA h g−1	
177

Sodium lignin sulfonate	Hard carbon microspheres	Spray drying process and carbonization	Anode material for sodium-ion batteries	Reversible capacity: 339 mA h g−1; initial coulombic efficiency: 88.3%	
178

Alkali lignin	Lignin-derived hard carbon	Low-temperature pre-oxidation	Anode for sodium-ion batteries	Rate capability: 235.6 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1; cycle performance: 288.7 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1after 250 cycles	
191

Sodium lignosulfonate	Porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets	Gas-exfoliation and in situ templating	Electrode material for supercapacitor	Specific capacitance: 320 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1; cycling stability: 93.5% retention after 10000 cycles at 5.0 A g−1	
193

Lignin form corn stalk refining residue	Lignin-based carbon fibers	Modification and fractionation strategy; electrospun	Electrodes for supercapacitor	Energy storage density: 442.2 F g−1	
194

Alcell® lignin	Activated carbon fibers	H3PO4 activation and partial gasification with oxygen during the carbonization step	Self-standing supercapacitor electrodes	Energy density: 8.4 W h kg−1; maximum deliverable power: 47 kW kg−1; capacitance: 85% retention after 5000 cycles at 1.3 V	
195

Kraft lignin	Lignin based porous carbon monolith	Dual templates (P123 and silica nanoparticles) and carbonization procedure	Electrodes for supercapacitor	Capacitance: 2.7 F cm−2; specific/volumetric capacitance: 200.2 F g−1/104.5 F cm−3	
197

Sodium lignosulfonate	Lignosulfonate/single-walled carbon nanotube	Hydrothermal process	Electrodes for flexible supercapacitor	Specific capacitance: 292 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1; energy density: 17.1 W h kg−1at 324 W kg−1; electrochemical stability: 98% capacitance retention after 1000 bending cycles for 90°	
199

Lignosulfonate	Lignosulfonate functionalized graphene hydrogels	One-step hydrothermal process	Electrodes for flexible supercapacitor	Specific capacitance: 408 F g−1 at 1 A g−1; rate capability: 75.4% retention at 20 A g−1; cycling stability: 84.4% retention after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1	
200

Lignin derived from the corncob	Hybrid double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel electrolyte	Formation of lignin hydrophobic aggregation	Electrolyte for flexible supercapacitor	Specific capacitance: 190 F g−1; energy density: 15.24 W h kg−1	
201

Alkali lignin (molecular weight = 10000)	Lignin hydrogel electrolytes; lignin/PAN nanofiber electrodes	Base-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization and cross-linking electrospinning and self-activation process	Electrolyte and electrodes for flexible supercapacitor	Capacitance: 129.23 F g−1, 95% retention over 10000 cycle; coulombic efficiency: 95.95%; maximum energy/power density: 4.49 W h kg−1/2.63 kW kg−1	
206


 	Fig. 10  Preparation of hierarchical lignin-derived porous carbon (HLPC) and the lithium storage mechanism. (a) Schematic diagram of HLPC preparation. (b) Lithium storage mechanism of HLPC. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram showing the synthesis of porous lignin-derived carbon quasi-nanosheets (PLC). LS: sodium lignosulfonate; LS/ZnC2O4: lignosulfonate/zinc oxalate composites. Reprinted from ref. 193, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Preparation, photograph and SEM images of flexible solid-state supercapacitor made from lignosulfonate-functionalized graphene hydrogel (LS-GH). (a) Schematic process of fabricating flexible supercapacitor. (b) Photograph of flexible supercapacitor. SEM image of the interior microstructure of LS-GH after applying pressure of 0.2 MPa at low magnification (c) and at high magnification (d). Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  Possible adsorption mechanism of amino-functionalized lignin microsphere for Ni2+, Cd2+, Cr(VI), and As(V). Reprinted from ref. 219, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Preparation of lignin-based polyurethane adhesive starting from acetic acid lignin (AAL) extracted from bagasse. Reprinted from ref. 130, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.	 

LignoBoost™ softwood kraft lignin	Lignin nanoparticles	Drug delivery	Sorafenib, benzazulene and capecitabine	Low cytotoxicity; enhanced the antiproliferative effect of benzazulene in different cell lines	
246

Lignin	Lignin hydrogels	Drug delivery	Hydrophobic drug (curcumin)	Sustaining drug release: up to 4 days	
247

Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin	Lignin-based hollow nanoparticles	Drug delivery	Antitumor drug hydroxycamptothecin	Low toxicity; drug loading and encapsulation efficiency: 70.6% ± 9% and 22.02% ± 2%	
248

Sodium lignosulphonate	Sodium lignosulfonate-grafted poly(acrylic acid-co-poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)) hydrogel	Drug delivery	Amoxicillin	pH-responsive control-release behaviors; the cumulative release rate in simulated gastric fluids: up to 51.5% in 24 h and about 32% for 2 h; the cumulative release rate in intestinal fluids: 84.5% in 24 h and 63.3% after 5 h	
256

Alkaline lignin; pretreated lignin from poplar; enzymatic hydrolysis lignin; kraft lignin	Lignin nanoparticles	Drug delivery	Gatifloxacin, doxorubicin hydrochloride and doxorubicin	Eliminating unfavorable factors of restricted processing pH and lignin specie; encapsulation efficiency: up to 90%; sustaining drug-releasing capability and biocompatibility; easy to recycle	
251

Kraft lignin (low sulphonate content, M.W. ∼10000 Da)	Lignin nanoparticles	Drug delivery	Irinotecan	Drug loading and encapsulation efficiency: 13.61% ± 0.59% and 67.65% ± 1.95%; drug diffusing out due to difference in concentration gradient	
252

Lignin from sulfite papermaking pulp	Lignin–chitosan–PVA composite hydrogel	Wound dressing	No drug	Good bactericidal activity and antioxidant activity; high mechanical strength; large tensile deformation; maintaining a moist healing environment	
258

Lignin (low sulfate content)	Carrageenan-based nanocomposite hydrogels	Wound dressing	No drug	Biocompatible against the mouse fibroblast cell line (L929); reducing the wound area to less than 3% within two weeks	
259

Lignin	Biomimetic lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel	Wound dressing	No drug	Excellent self-healing properties and bactericidal activity; accelerating wound healing of rat model within 12 days; reuse more than 5 times	
260

Alkali lignin	Chitosan–alkali lignin hydrogels	Scaffolds for tissue engineering and wound healing	No drug	Non-toxic to mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and to zebrafish up to 100 μg mL−1in vivo; providing a conducive surface for cell attachment and proliferation; improving cell migration across the scratch of NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblast cell	
262

Lignin extracted from wood pulp	Hydrogels	Wound dressing	No drug	Good antibacterial activity; no obvious cytotoxicity to L929 cells in vitro and main organs of rats in vivo; accelerating MRSA-infected wound healing	
264

Methanol fractionation of kraft lignin	Lignin–PVA hydrogels	Scaffold for tissue engineering	No drug	Sufficient mechanical stability; a lack of cytotoxicity; allowing the ingrowth of cells into the scaffold	
266

Alkali lignin (Mn = 5000 g mol−1)	Polycaprolactone/lignin–polycaprolactone nanofibers	Scaffold for tissue engineering	No drug	Free radical inhibition: 98.3% ± 1.9% within 4 h; promoting the proliferation of Schwann cells	
269


 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the preparation of lignin nanoparticles for drug delivery. (a) Incomplete self-assembly in the presence of water. (b) Uncontrollable self-assembly in dilute aqueous HCl. (c) Controllable self-assembly when dilute aqueous HCl was replaced with water after 4 h. Reprinted from ref. 252, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Preparation and characteristics of lignin/poly(ionic liquids) composite hydrogel dressing (HILx). The content of lignin in HIL0, HIL1, HIL2 and HIL3 was 0 wt%, 20 wt%, 40 wt% and 60 wt%, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 260, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Possible release mechanism of lignin-based coated fertilizer. (a) Rupture mechanism. (b) Diffusion mechanism. Adapted and reprinted from ref. 288, copyright (2021), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Selective oxypropylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups in softwood kraft lignin using propylene oxide. Adapted and reprinted from ref. 297, copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.	 

Lignin-based phenol	8000000	12–15	1–1.5	For the preparation of bisphenol A, phenolic resins, Polyamide 6 and other phenol derivatives	
17, 306 and 307
Lignin-based vanillin	16000	0.2	12	Food additive, cosmetic ingredient, and pharmaceuticals	
17, 306 and 308

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
