Metallic nanostructures with low dimensionality for electrochemical water splitting  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00013B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00013B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3072-3106Metallic nanostructures with low dimensionality for electrochemical water splitting

        
          
            Leigang 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pengtang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Shao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, No. 199 Ren’ai Road, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China. E-mail: hxq006@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      11th February 2020
    First published on 20th April 2020AbstractMetallic nanostructures with low dimensionality (one-dimension and two-dimension) possess unique structural characteristics and distinctive electronic and physicochemical properties including high aspect ratio, high specific surface area, high density of surface unsaturated atoms and high electron mobility. These distinctive features have rendered them remarkable advantages over their bulk counterparts for surface-related applications, for example, electrochemical water splitting. In this review article, we highlight the recent research progress in low-dimensional metallic nanostructures for electrochemical water splitting including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Fundamental understanding of the electrochemistry of water splitting including HER and OER is firstly provided from the aspects of catalytic mechanisms, activity descriptors and property evaluation metrics. Generally, it is challenging to obtain low-dimensional metallic nanostructures with desirable characteristics for HER and OER. We hereby introduce several typical methods for synthesizing one-dimensional and two-dimensional metallic nanostructures including organic ligand-assisted synthesis, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, carbon monoxide confined growth, topotactic reduction, and templated growth. We then put emphasis on the strategies adopted for the design and fabrication of high-performance low-dimensional metallic nanostructures for electrochemical water splitting such as alloying, structure design, surface engineering, interface engineering and strain engineering. The underlying structure–property correlation for each strategy is elucidated aiming to facilitate the design of more advanced electrocatalysts for water splitting. The challenges and perspectives for the development of electrochemical water splitting and low-dimensional metallic nanostructures are also proposed.
Leigang Li
Leigang Li received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Texas A&M University under the supervision of Professor Haiyan Wang in 2017. He then worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Purdue University. Since 2018, he has been working as a postdoctoral research fellow at Soochow University in Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group. His current research interest is focused on the design and synthesis of metallic nanostructures for electrocatalytic applications.
Pengtang Wang
Pengtang Wang received his BS degree from Soochow University in 2015. Now he is pursuing his PhD degree in Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. His current research interests are focused on the phase and interface control of metal-based catalysts for electrochemical applications.
Qi Shao
Qi Shao received her PhD degree in Applied Physics from City University of Hong Kong in 2016, working in the field of magnetically controlled electronic and optical properties of diluted magnetic semiconductors. Then she joined Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University as an assistant professor in 2016. Her current research interests are mainly focused on non-noble metal based catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion, such as overall water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Xiaoqing Huang
Xiaoqing Huang is currently a Professor at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. He obtained his BS in chemistry education from Southwest Normal University (2005) and PhD in inorganic chemistry from Xiamen University (2011) under the supervision of Profs Nanfeng Zheng and Lansun Zheng. He then worked as a postdoctoral research associate in Profs Yu Huang and Xiangfeng Duan's group from 2011 to 2014 at the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials for energy related applications such as electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen (H2) has found a wide spectrum of applications ranging from industrial production of ammonia and methanol to semiconductor manufacturing and petroleum refining. More importantly, the ever-increasing demand for clean and renewable energy technology has opened a new avenue for efficiently utilizing hydrogen,1–3 for example, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), where hydrogen and oxygen are converted to electricity with only water produced. Hydrogen is mainly produced by steam methane reforming currently (95% in United States), which is operated under harsh conditions and is energy-intensive.4 Electrochemical water splitting (EWS) has been regarded as a clean and promising approach for generating hydrogen operating under mild conditions and powered by renewable energy. Electrochemical water splitting involves two reactions, that is, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on the anode. Despite the advantages of EWS over steam methane reforming for producing H2, highly active and durable catalysts have to be adopted to overcome the kinetic barrier to promote the reaction kinetics, especially for OER.5 Up to date, diversified electrocatalysts have been developed for boosting the kinetics of HER and OER, such as metals,6–14 metal oxides,15–18 and metal chalcogenides.19–23 Of this category, metallic materials have drawn remarkable attention stemming from their relatively high activity and electrical conductivity. However, a large gap still exists in fulfilling the practical application of these metallic electrocatalysts mainly because of their unsatisfactory performance far from industrial standards and high cost (especially for precious metals).
Nanoengineering has provided unprecedented opportunities for the development of metallic catalysts in the rational design, synthesis and characterization. Metallic nanostructures with low dimensionality, such as one-dimensional (1D) nanowires (NWs)/nanotubes/nanorods and two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets (NSs)/nanoplates, have exhibited significantly enhanced catalytic performance as well as increased atomic utilization efficiency compared to the bulk counterparts.7,8,24–26 When the dimension falls in the range of nanoscale, the metallic materials exhibit dramatically different physical and chemical properties from those of the bulk counterparts. Take the 1D metallic NWs and 2D metallic NSs as examples. Both 1D metallic NWs and 2D metallic NSs possess much higher electron mobility, higher density of surface unsaturated atoms as active sites and ultrahigh specific surface area than those of bulk counterparts. The 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures also outperform the non-metallic materials, metal chalcogenides/phosphides, and metals in zero-dimension (0D) or other dimensions (such as bulk) in the above mentioned aspects. These distinct features of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures have endowed them with unexpected opportunities for surface-related electrochemical reactions. But on the other hand, the synthesis of 1D and 2D metallics remains a big challenge as the 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures are thermodynamically unfavorable. The metal atoms show a strong tendency to form 0D metal nanoparticles to minimize the high surface energy. Benefiting from the advancement in nanotechnology and continuous efforts, various effective methods have been developed for the synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures, including organic ligand-assisted synthesis,27–29 hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis,30,31 carbon monoxide confined growth,8,32,33 topotactic reduction,9,34,35 and templated growth.6,36
Furthermore, extensive efforts have been devoted to improving the electrochemical performance of 1D/2D metallic nanostructures taking advantage of the inherent structural merits and the advancement in synthetic methods. An electrochemical reaction involves the interaction between the reactant molecules and the surface of the catalysts, basically including three steps: adsorption, activation and desorption. Based on the classical Sabatier principle, a heterogeneous catalyst with high reactivity for a specific reaction should have optimal adsorption/desorption strength (neither too strong nor too weak) with the molecules/intermediates and reaction products.37 Keeping this rule in mind, diversified strategies have been utilized to optimize the adsorption/desorption strength by tuning the physicochemical properties of surface and near-surface atoms. Among the proposed strategies, alloying with other metal element(s) is a commonly used and straightforward method to intrinsically modify the electronic and electrochemical properties of metallic nanostructures.9,38 The d-band center of metallics could be optimized after being alloyed with other metal element(s) resulting in optimal adsorption/desorption strength and thus boosted electrochemical water splitting performance. One ready example is the 2D Mo–Ni–Fe nanobelts with highly improved oxygen evolution properties compared to Mo–Ni nanobelts in basic electrolytes because of the addition of Fe.38 Alloying with Fe leads to weakened binding with OH*, O* and OOH*, and optimal d-band center position. Another case is the Ni–Mo alloy which is regarded as a typical alkaline hydrogen evolution catalyst. Alloying of Ni and Mo has resulted in a similar surface electronic state of the Ni–Mo alloy to Pt and therefore the Ni–Mo alloy has exhibited comparable and even much better hydrogen evolution property than the benchmark Pt catalyst in 1 M KOH.9,39,40 Strain tuning is another effective strategy to manipulate the electronic structure of catalysts and the binding strength of adsorbates on catalyst surface for enhanced electrochemical properties.41–44
Besides optimizing adsorption/desorption strength, maximizing the number of catalytic active sites has become a popular topic recently in enhancing the electrochemical properties of metallic nanostructures. To realize the maximization of active adsorption sites for reactants and intermediates, advanced strategies including structure design, surface engineering and interface engineering have been proposed to achieve enhanced water splitting properties. The design and fabrication of special structures with unique characteristics may increase the electrochemical surface area and provide more active sites for enhancing the electrochemical properties, for example, the Ir superstructure composed of 2D NSs, the channel-rich RuCu NSs, and the amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods with rich defects as active sites.26,45,46 Furthermore, with the development in nanotechnology and in-depth understanding of electrocatalysis, tremendous progress has been achieved in enhancing the electrochemical properties by surface-engineering such as dealloying and surface modification.47 For example, modification of 2D ultrathin Ni nanosheets by surface adsorbed sulfide Sadδ− introduced during synthesis has given rise to superior alkaline hydrogen evolution property.47 Although the under-coordinated ultrathin Ni nanosheets were believed to be mainly responsible for the excellent hydrogen evolution performance, the small amount of sulfide Sadδ− on the Ni surface has promoted the dissociation of water molecules providing more active sites for water splitting. Meanwhile, interface engineering is also of paramount significance in improving the electrochemical properties of metallic nanostructures. By creating an interface between two phases, where the electrochemical reaction occurs, substantial interfacial active sites could be generated.24,48 Typical examples of interface engineering enhanced water splitting are related to Pt-based catalysts such as Pt–Ni/NiO interface and Pt/Ni(OH)2 interface.24,49 Either NiO or Ni(OH)2 can facilitate the dissociation of water molecules and the produced H intermediates are then adsorbed by the nearby Pt to produce H2. It is worth mentioning that, it is not easy to clearly distinguish the boundary between optimizing binding strength and maximizing active sites in many cases. These two strategies often work synergistically to contribute to the electrochemical property enhancement. For example, the dramatically improved water splitting properties of RuCu NSs were not only attributed to the optimized electronic structures (optimal binding strength) but also to the abundant active sites (because of the 2D NSs and rich channels with lattice distortion).26
The past few years have witnessed rapid development in the synthesis of low-dimensional metallic nanostructures and their application in electrochemical water splitting. There have been review articles on 0D nanoparticles for electrochemical water splitting.50–52 However, the achievements in 1D and 2D metallics for electrochemical water splitting have not been systematically summarized yet. Considering the importance of electrochemical water splitting and the effectiveness of the aforementioned strategies in enhancing the catalytic properties, the gap has to be filled by providing a timely comprehensive review specifically focusing on 1D/2D metallic nanostructure catalyzed electrochemical water splitting. In this review article, we firstly summarize the electrochemistry of water splitting including HER and OER. Fundamental understanding of HER and OER is also provided from the aspects of catalytic mechanisms and activity descriptors. Next, the progress in the synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures by different methods is introduced, including organic ligand-assisted synthesis, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, carbon monoxide (CO) confined growth, topotactic reduction, and templated growth. We then put emphasis on the strategies used for improving the HER and OER properties of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures (including both pure metals and metal-based nanomaterials) by demonstrating the most important achievements (Scheme 1). The underlying structure–property correlation is demonstrated for each strategy aiming to provide an in-depth understanding of the working mechanism and thus to guide the design of more efficient metallic electrocatalysts for water splitting. Finally, the existing challenges and perspectives for the development of electrochemical water splitting and 1D/2D metallic electrocatalysts are proposed.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis methods and main strategies used for improving the electrochemical water splitting performance of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures. 
2. Fundamentals of electrochemical water splitting
2.1 Overview of electrochemical water splitting
As aforementioned, electrochemical water splitting includes two half-reactions of HER and OER on the cathode and anode side of an electrolyte cell, respectively, each of which follows different reaction pathways depending on the (electro)chemical and electronic properties of the electrode surface. The activity, reaction kinetics, and stability also vary with the intrinsic properties of the electrode surface and the actual electrochemical conditions. Under standard conditions (25 °C and 1 atm), the theoretical thermodynamic potential for water splitting is 1.23 V regardless of the electrolyte (acidic or alkaline). Practically, a much higher voltage than the theoretical value (the difference is called overpotential) is required to drive water splitting at a satisfied reaction rate. The overpotential (η) comes from the activation barrier of anode and cathode as well as other resistance (e.g., contact and solution resistances). The practical potential (EP) for water splitting can be then expressed as51EP = 1.23 V + ηa + ηc + ηotherwhere ηa, ηc and ηother denote the partial overpotential from anode, cathode and other resistance, respectively. Highly efficient electrocatalysts have to be adopted to decrease the overpotential coming from the anode and cathode sides. In the following sections, the possible reaction mechanism, activity descriptors and property evaluation metrics as well as fundamental understanding of HER and OER will be summarized, which would help the design and fabrication of high-performance electrocatalysts for HER and OER.
2.2 Fundamentals of HER

2.2.1 Reaction mechanism. 
HER could be considered as the simplest electrochemical reaction and the cornerstone of investigating more complicated reactions involving multiple electron–proton transfer. Despite its simplicity, HER is still a multi-step reaction including adsorption, reduction and desorption processes occurring on the electrode surface. It follows different reaction pathways depending on the electrode properties. The generally accepted possible reaction mechanisms in acidic and alkaline electrolytes are summarized in Table 1.1 The first step in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes is called the Volmer reaction, a process of electrochemical adsorption of hydrogen (H) atoms on the active sites of the electrode surface. A M–H* bond is formed between the adsorbed H atom and the electrode surface by a one-electron transfer process. The adsorbed H* atoms are then reduced forming H2 molecules via either Heyrovsky or Tafel reaction and the formed gaseous H2 will be finally desorbed from the electrode surface. For a specific HER, the possible rate-determining step (RDS) could be determined by evaluating the Tafel slope value, which can be obtained from the HER polarization curve (Table 1).
Table 1 Reaction pathways of HER in acidic and alkaline electrolytes




Electrolyte
Reactions


Overall reaction
1st step
2nd step


Volmer reaction: electrochemical adsorption
Heyrovsky reaction: electrochemical desorption
Tafel reaction: chemical desorption


Tafel slope: 
Tafel slope: 
Tafel slope: 




Acidic solution
2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2
M + H+ + e− ↔ M–H*
M–H* + H+ + e− ↔ M + H2
2M–H* ↔ 2M + H2


Alkaline solution
2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2 + 2OH−
M + H2O + e− ↔ M–H* + OH−
M–H* + H2O + e− ↔ M + OH− + H2






2.2.2 Comparison of acidic and alkaline HER. 
HER in acidic electrolytes usually uses platinum group metals as catalysts at high cost. And the use of acidic proton exchange membrane systems and strong acids further increases the cost. The highly corrosive conditions also bring safety concerns and stability issues. Furthermore, the produced H2 may be contaminated by the evaporated acidic electrolyte and the electrolysis cell can be corroded by the strong acid. Alkaline HER, on the other hand, could avoid the aforementioned issues with acidic HER. The cost of HER in alkaline electrolytes can be highly decreased and the stability can be largely improved. More importantly, it opens an avenue for the use of earth-abundant transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co and Ni) as catalysts, which can help further reduce the cost. Despite this, the much slower reaction kinetics of alkaline HER has restricted the practical application. For example, it has been reported that the kinetics of HER in alkaline electrolytes is two to three orders of magnitude lower than that in acidic electrolytes.53 Therefore, efforts should be devoted to the improvement of reaction kinetics of HER in alkaline electrolytes by designing high-efficiency electrocatalysts.
To help the design and fabrication of high-performance HER electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes, the difference of HER in acidic and alkaline electrolytes has to be well elucidated. As indicated by the reaction mechanism proposed in Section 2.2.1, the HER process is initiated by the formation of M–H* with the proton provided by the electrolyte in either acidic or alkaline electrolyte. In acidic electrolytes, there are a large number of hydroniums (H3O+) with weak covalent bonding which can facilitate each step of HER and thereby lead to fast reaction kinetics. In alkaline electrolytes, however, there is no hydronium but abundant hydroxyls which may poison the active sites of the catalysts. To start HER in alkaline electrolytes, extra energy is required to dissociate water molecules by breaking the strong H–O–H covalent bond which produces protons for the formation of M–H* (Volmer step). This water dissociation step has set a high energy barrier for initiating the alkaline HER process. Therefore, the HER process in alkaline electrolytes is much harder and much higher overpotential is required to achieve the same current density compared to that in acidic electrolytes. Currently, Pt still represents the state-of-the-art electrocatalyst for HER in alkaline electrolytes but high loading of Pt is required to achieve desirable reaction kinetics which inevitably increases the cost. Even for the state-of-the-art Pt, the reaction kinetics in alkaline electrolytes is much slower than that in acidic electrolytes. Alkaline water electrolysis is of paramount significance in the treatment of excreted alkaline water in industry, such as water-alkali and chlor-alkali electrolyzers. Effective strategies have to be employed to accelerate the reaction kinetics of alkaline HER especially for earth-abundant transition metal catalysts. From the discussion above, increasing the water dissociation ability of catalysts would possibly improve the HER activity of a catalyst in alkaline electrolytes. It has been experimentally proved that an effective approach is designing hybrid electrocatalysts with one component promoting water dissociation and the other one for hydrogen reduction and H2 formation. For example, Ni(OH)2 decorated Pt can lead to an eight fold improvement of HER activity compared to pure Pt in 0.1 M KOH as reported by Markovic and coworkers.54 It was proposed that dissociation of water molecules occurs at the edges of Ni(OH)2 clusters producing hydrogen intermediates which facilitates the following reaction steps and gives rise to highly enhanced reaction kinetics. This strategy is also effective for other cost-effective metals such as Ni, Cu and Ag. Besides the above mentioned strategy, other efforts have also been devoted to the improvement of HER kinetics in alkaline electrolytes as discussed in the following sections.

2.3 Fundamentals of OER

2.3.1 Reaction mechanism. 
OER, a 4e− transfer reaction, involves a series of consecutive elementary steps in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes. The possible reaction mechanisms for OER are listed in Table 2.5 The possible reaction mechanisms for both acidic and alkaline OER involve the formation of intermediates of OH*, O* and OOH*. For both acidic and alkaline OER, intermediates of M–OH* and M–O* would be formed in the first two reaction steps. Next, the following reactions may proceed by the direct combination of M–OH* forming O2 molecules. Or another intermediate M–OOH* is formed with M–OH* reacting with H2O or OH−. The formed M–OOH* interacts further with H2O or OH− to produce O2 molecules finally. This indirect route would definitely require much higher energy and overpotential, leading to lower activity and sluggish kinetics. The detailed reaction pathways and reaction kinetics are highly dependent on the binding strength of the M–O bond of M–OH*, or M–O*, or M–OOH*. Similar to HER, the Tafel slope value can tell information regarding the reaction pathways and RDS of OER. A Tafel slope value of 120 mV dec−1 may indicate that the RDS of an electrochemical reaction is the first electron transfer reaction. If the chemical reaction after the first electron transfer reaction (electrochemical reaction) is the RDS, the Tafel slope value is 60 mV dec−1. For OER with four electron transfer, the Tafel slope value is 30 mV dec−1 if the third electron transfer reaction is the RDS. A smaller Tafel slope value indicates that the reaction kinetics is faster and the RDS is a reaction step in the later part of a multi-step reaction.5
Table 2 Reaction pathways of OER in acidic and alkaline electrolytes




Electrolyte
Reaction


Overall reaction
Intermediate reaction steps




Acidic solution
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
M + H2O → M–OH* + H+ + e−


M–OH* + OH− → M–O* + H2O + e−


Then either


2M–O* → 2M + O2 or


M–O* + H2O → MOOH* + H+ + e−


MOOH* + H2O → M + O2 + H+ + e−






Alkaline solution
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
M + OH− → M–OH*


M–OH* + OH− → M–O* + H2O


Then either


2M–O* → 2M + O2 or


M–O* + OH− → M–OOH* + e−


M–OOH* + OH− → M + O2 + H2O






2.3.2 Comparison of acidic and alkaline OER. 
Generally, an electrocatalyst possesses much higher OER activity in an alkaline electrolyte than in an acidic electrolyte, which is contrary to the scenario of HER. The reason lies in that the OER process is started by the formation of OH* and O* species on the catalyst surface as indicated by the proposed reaction mechanisms for OER in Table 2. In alkaline electrolytes, abundant hydroxyls exist which can promote the formation of M–OH* and M–O* by the first two reaction steps. Following the facile formation of M–OH* and M–O* in alkaline electrolytes, the OER process can then follow either the direct combination of M–O* or further formation of M–OOH* to produce O2 molecules with desirable reaction kinetics. Therefore, it is more imperative to develop high-performance alkaline HER electrocatalysts to couple with OER catalysts in alkaline electrolytes for efficient full water splitting. In contrast, there is no hydroxyl ion in acidic electrolytes and additional energy is needed to break the strong covalent bond of H2O molecules to produce OH− for the following reaction steps. Similar to the case of HER, the extra energy for the cleavage of the H–O–H bond has resulted in a high energy barrier for the initiation of the OER process in acidic electrolytes. But there are exceptions in that some OER catalysts show better or comparable activity in acidic electrolytes, for example, the Ru-based electrocatalysts.26,55

2.4 Activity descriptors
The activity and reaction kinetics of an electrocatalyst are determined by its intrinsic electronic and physicochemical properties. The interaction (adsorption/desorption strength) between the catalyst surface and the reactants/intermediates can serve as a descriptor of the activity and kinetics. Unfortunately, there is still no experimental method for measuring the binding energy between the catalyst surface and intermediates, making it difficult to quantitatively establish a correlation between the intrinsic material properties and the electrochemical performance. Owing to the development in computational quantum chemistry, the density functional theory (DFT) calculation based on first-principles has provided people a feasible way of probing the interaction between the catalyst and the intermediates. The DFT calculation can help with the elucidation of the reaction mechanism including reaction pathways and active centers. Correspondingly, several activity descriptors predicting the catalyst–intermediate interaction, reaction kinetics and reaction pathways have been established. In the following sections, several activity descriptors will be presented which may offer guidance in the design of advanced electrocatalysts for high-efficiency HER and OER.

2.4.1 Adsorption free energy. 
From the thermodynamics point of view, the Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) can indicate the reaction pathways. For HER, the H-binding energy could be used to predict the activity and kinetics of an electrocatalyst. The Gibbs free energy change for H* adsorption on the catalyst surface (ΔGH*) reflects the H-binding strength, which can be used to study the H* adsorption and H2 desorption behaviors. According to the Sabatier principle, an optimal adsorption/desorption strength would give rise to the best electrochemical properties.37 If ΔGH* > 0, the H-binding strength is weak and the activation of reactant/intermediates on the catalyst surface is difficult. The Volmer step will be the RDS and the catalysts show poor HER activity. And if ΔGH* < 0, the H-binding strength is strong and the active sites will be all occupied by intermediates causing the poisoning effect. In addition, the desorption of H2 from the catalyst surface (via Heyrovsky or Tafel step) is not facile which also limits the reaction kinetics. When ΔGH* = 0, the reaction kinetics (reflected by the exchange current density j0) can achieve the maximum value theoretically. Based on the microkinetic model study, a volcano-type plot has been derived for the exchange current density (in log form, logj0) and calculated ΔGH* (Fig. 1a) with the optimal ΔGH* value of 0 eV.56,57 The volcano plot can be dated back to more than eighty years ago and is obtained based on Langmuir type of adsorption.58–60 It is a reflection of the Sabatier principle and is of vital importance in electrocatalysis. The descriptor ΔGH* is quite useful in predicting the HER kinetics of a wide range of electrocatalysts as indicated in Fig. 1b.61–66 For example, Durst et al. investigated the HER activities of Pt, Pd and Ir in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes and the exchange current density is about two orders of magnitude lower in alkaline electrolytes than in acidic electrolytes.53 Analysis based on H-binding energy and exchange current density pointed out that H-binding energy could serve as a good descriptor for HER in both acid and base. Yan et al. studied the HER performance of several monometals (Pt, Pd, Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) in alkaline electrolytes. The results showed that the exchange current density and calculated H-binding energy with the metal surface follow a volcano-type relationship. The H-binding energy was proposed to be an activity descriptor for identifying HER electrocatalysts in alkaline media.63 An excellent HER electrocatalyst should have a relatively strong M–H* bond to promote the electron transfer and the M–H* bond should also be weak enough to facilitate the H2 release from the catalyst surface, that is, an optimum H-binding strength is required.
 Fig. 1  (a) A volcano-type plot showing the relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* based on the Langmuir adsorption model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 1958, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* for a series of HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Scaling relation between the adsorption energy of OOH* and OH* for a series of oxide catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Activity trends for a series of OER electrocatalysts as a function of standard free energy . Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
A consensus has been achieved that quantum chemistry-calculated ΔGH* can be used as an effective and sole activity descriptor for HER in acidic media.61,67 However, there is debate on the validity of ΔGH* in predicting the HER activity of electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes despite the substantial literature reports proposing ΔGH* as an activity descriptor for both acidic and alkaline HER electrocatalysts. One important point that arouses the debate is related to the dissociation of water molecules generating protons for the following reaction steps.68–70 The water dissociation step has set a high energy barrier for initiating HER in alkaline media and therefore energetics related to OH* has to be taken into account when evaluating the HER activity of an electrocatalyst in an alkaline electrolyte. For example, Markovic et al. proposed that the HER activities of 3d-M hydr(oxy)oxides in alkaline media can be described by the OH–M2+δ bond strength (0 ≤ δ ≤ 1.5).70 A trend for HER activity was found to be Mn < Fe < Co < Ni, which is in accordance with the strength of the OH–M2+δ bond (Ni < Co < Fe < Mn). Meanwhile, it was also proposed that ΔGH* can function as an effective descriptor in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes without considering OH* as mentioned above.53 Compared to acidic HER, the HER process in alkaline electrolytes is much more complicated. The nature of the active sites and the reaction mechanism of HER in alkaline media are not well elucidated. Therefore, more efforts are called for the investigation of HER in alkaline electrolytes to get more in-depth understanding of the reaction intermediates and mechanisms.
Similar to ΔGH*, used as an activity descriptor for HER electrocatalysts, the oxygen adsorption energy ΔGO* is adopted to describe the activity of OER electrocatalysts as proposed by Rossmeisl, Nørskov and co-workers.72,73 By studying the electrochemical process of water splitting over Pt(111) and Au(111) using DFT calculations, it was proposed that the oxygen adsorption energy can work as an activity descriptor of OER electrocatalysts. Later, they correlated the OER activity of oxide catalysts to a universal descriptor, that is, standard free energy .71 A scaling relation for adsorption energy of OOH* and OH* can be found for OER oxide electrocatalysts (Fig. 1c).71,74 By correlating the calculated theoretical overpotential and binding energy difference between O* and OH*, it was found that the OER activity and standard free energy  follow a volcano-type relationship (Fig. 1d).66 In fact, the pioneering work of the OER volcano-type plot can be traced back to more than 30 years ago when Trasatti used the enthalpy in the lower → higher valence state transition to describe the electrochemical properties of several metal oxides (IrO2, RuO2, Co3O4 and IrO2 + RuO2 mixtures).75,76 The enthalpy of transition forms a volcano relation with the OER overpotential. It was claimed that the metal oxides should not be oxidized too easily or too hardly. Or else, the intermediates will be adsorbed on the catalyst surface either too strongly or too weakly, both leading to poor OER activities. Of important note, the volcano relation proposed by Trasatti did not consider the reaction mechanism on different oxide surfaces. The main goal of the relation was to get an activity descriptor for OER on oxides.
The standard free energy  has now been widely used to investigate the OER activity of a variety of catalysts including metals, metal oxides (rutile, spinel, rock salt and perovskite oxides), and metal-free carbon materials.66,77–83 For instance, Garold et al. studied the influence of nitrogen doping on the OER overpotential of carbon nanotubes by DFT simulations.80 A small amount of nitrogen doping can largely reduce the OER overpotential of carbon nanotubes. The overpotentials of doped and undoped carbon nanotubes obey a volcano relationship with . Sergio and co-workers investigated the OER activity of Na-doped SrRuO3 in an acidic electrolyte and found that Na doping can optimize the binding strength with the intermediates. A volcano plot between the OER overpotential of Na-doped SrRuO3 and  was obtained.77 Based on the scaling relation of the adsorption energy of OOH* and OH*, an adsorption energy difference of 1.23 eV would give rise to a zero overpotential for OER. Therefore, efforts should be devoted to the stabilization of OOH* against OH* in order to design advanced OER electrocatalysts. The volcano plot of OER activity and the standard free energy  is also a reflection of the Sabatier principle. Over the past few decades, the Sabatier principle has been used by researchers to rationalize the activity trend of a wide spectrum of OER electrocatalysts.81,84–86 However, there is research that challenges the effectiveness of the Sabatier principle. Ding-Yuan and co-workers carried out an experimental assessment of the Sabatier principle by experimentally measuring the oxygen electroadsorption energy on RuO2(110) and IrO2(110).81 No direct correlation was found for the OER activity and electroadsorption energy of OH* and O*. The authors thereby claimed that the Sabatier principle may not describe highly active electrocatalysts, the kinetics of which may influence the electrochemical reactions more strongly than the electroadsorption energy.


2.4.2 Free-energy diagram. 
The adsorption free energy is a thermodynamic assessment of electrocatalysts’ activity and cannot contain all the possible reaction-rate limiting steps. The Sabatier principle may lose its applicability when evaluating the activity of electrocatalysts. For example, Ding-Yuan et al. proposed that the Sabatier principle may not be able to describe highly active electrocatalysts with fast kinetics only from the electroadsorption energy.81 The adsorption energy only captures the thermodynamics of the intermediates without providing kinetic information. The free-energy diagram can provide possible extra reaction-rate limiting steps which are not considered in calculating the adsorption energy. It contains not only the thermodynamic adsorption energy of each intermediate but also the kinetic barrier between each step. The overall reaction rate is also highly related to the kinetic barrier between two intermediate states besides the free-energy level of each reaction step.57 It is therefore highly necessary to combine both thermodynamic and kinetic information in evaluating the activity of an electrocatalyst. The calculation of adsorption energy ΔG is the foundation for calculating the free-energy diagram. ΔG can be calculated by the following equation:1,87,88ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS + ΔGU + ΔG(pH) + ΔGfieldwhere ΔE is the ground-state energy and can be calculated by first-principles calculations, ΔZPE is the zero point energy correction, TΔS is the entropy term, ΔGU is the free energy term related to the change of electrode potential, ΔG(pH) is related to the pH value of the electrolyte, and ΔGfield is introduced because of the electrical double layer effect. As indicated by the equation, several factors have to be taken into account when calculating ΔG, such as pH of the electrolyte, electrode potential, and solvation and electric-double-layer effects.89,90 The free-energy diagram has been set up for different types of catalysts including metallic and non-metallic materials, which has served as an important approach in understanding the reaction mechanism.91–96


2.4.3 The d-band center theory. 
Although the volcano plot has demonstrated the importance of bond strength between intermediates and catalyst surface for HER/OER activity, it cannot help with the prediction and design of new catalysts with enhanced activity. The volcano plot only provides qualitative arguments for tuning the catalytic activity but does not show how to control the adsorbate binding strength on the catalyst surface to achieve a moderate value for the best catalytic performance. The catalytic properties of a material are determined by its inherent electronic properties and it is therefore necessary to take a closer view of how the electronic structure affects the binding strength of adsorbates on the catalyst surface. In this regard, the d-band center theory for metals and metal alloys/oxides has been developed to predict the chemisorption energies of various adsorbates on the catalyst surface.97–104
The d-band center (εd, the central position of d-orbitals referenced to the Fermi level) theory was developed by Hammer and Nørskov for the prediction of adsorption energies of reactants and intermediates on the surface of metals, metal alloys and oxides.105–107 When an adsorbate binds to the surface of metals/alloys/oxides, the electrons of the adsorbate will interact with valence bands of s, p and d of the catalyst forming chemical bonds (Fig. 2a).97,108 For the formation of the metal–adsorbate bond, it is the metal d-orbital electron that contributes to the bond mostly and governs the bond strength as the energies of s and p bands do not change significantly during the bond formation.108 The hybridization of the adsorbate's orbital with the metal d-orbital leads to a fully filled bonding molecular orbital (σ) and a partially filled antibonding molecular orbital (σ*). The energy levels or occupancy of anti-bonding orbitals determines the metal–adsorbate bond strength. An increased occupancy of anti-bonding orbitals by downshift of the d-band center would decrease the antibonding states above the Fermi level and weaken the metal–adsorbate bond.109 The bonding energy levels for transition metals are nearly the same but there is a large difference in the anti-bonding energy levels for different metals. The difference in the anti-bonding energy levels results in different interaction between the adsorbates and the catalyst surface which thus leads to different catalytic properties. For example, the filling of anti-bonding state for Au(111) and Cu(111) is higher than that of Ni(111) and Pt(111) during the hybridization of the H 1s orbital with the metal d orbital, and hence the hydrogen adsorption strength on Au(111) and Cu(111) is weaker than that on Ni(111) and Pt(111) (Fig. 2b).105 Therefore, Au(111) shows the poorest HER activity because of the largest filling of anti-bonding state while Pt(111) possesses the best HER performance owing to the most favorable εd value. Similarly, the oxygen 2p band of oxygen intermediates hybridizes with the metal d band forming a metal–oxygen chemical bond. The difference in the d orbitals of different metals/alloys/oxides leads to different occupancy of anti-bonding state and thus different adsorption strength.83,110
 Fig. 2  (a) A scheme showing the formation of a chemical bond between the metal surface and the adsorbate through orbital hybridization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2005, Springer Nature. (b) The projected density of states (DOS) for hydrogen atoms adsorbed on the (111) face of different metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 1995, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Relationship between hydrogen binding strength and d-band center for elemental metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Relationship between oxygen binding strength and d-band center for elemental metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2000, Elsevier Inc. 
The core of the d-band center theory is that the d-band center position determines the binding energy of an adsorbate on the catalyst surface and further influences the catalytic properties (Fig. 2c and d).1,37,111–113 An optimum εd value is desired for achieving the best electrochemical properties. The d-band center position can be tuned by altering the inter-atomic distance of surface atoms to achieve an optimized εd value through various strategies such as applying an elastic strain or alloying.43,114,115 The in-depth understanding of the relationship between the electronic structures and the influencing factors lays the foundation for optimizing catalytic activity by employing various strategies. Besides the d-band center theory developed for metals and metal alloys/oxides, other descriptors have also been proposed to correlate the catalytic performance with the electronic structure. For example, valence band theory was developed for non-metallic carbon materials with Ediff (the difference between the lowest and the highest valence orbital energies) as the activity descriptor.116–118 The eg-occupancy descriptor was developed for oxide electrocatalysts where an optimum eg value is required for achieving the best electrochemical performance.119 A too low eg occupancy (eg < 1) or a too high eg occupancy (eg > 1) would lead to too strong or too weak oxygen binding, respectively. The activity of oxide electrocatalysts and the eg-occupancy also follow a volcano relationship (Sabatier principle).120 Electronegativity, reflecting the energy level of transition metal 3d states, functions as a secondary activity descriptor for transition metal oxides with similar eg occupancy.121

2.5 Advantages of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures for water splitting
As briefly discussed in the previous section, 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures possess a variety of advantages over metal-based materials in other forms (0D and bulk). It was already proved by substantial works that 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures exhibit much better electrocatalytic properties than 0D nanoparticles.14,26,45,122 In comparison with 0D metallic nanoparticles, 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures are highly anisotropic with enhanced electrical conductivity and mass transport as well as higher resistibility to aggregation and dissolution. By controlling the synthesis conditions, highly active facets can be selectively exposed for boosted electrocatalysis. They also possess a high surface area to volume ratio and highly exposed surface active sites. Compared to 3D close-packed nanoparticles, the surface atoms of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures are highly unsaturated acting as highly active catalytic sites. Owing to the non-directional nature of metal bonds, the metal atoms tend to form 3D close-packed nanoparticles. When the metallic nanostructures are in 1D or 2D forms, however, significantly different structural and electronic properties could be generated. For example, surface electronic activation was revealed by DFT calculation for RuCu nanosheets with abundant edge sites.26 Because of the ultrathin nature of the 2D RuCu nanosheets, the lattice near the edge of the nanosheets is evidently distorted, and therefore the intermediating energetic cost for bond-dissociation is minimized. Furthermore, the strong t2g–eg splitting effect of Ru sites is largely attenuated at the edge of nanosheets as revealed by the projected DOS. Benefiting from the distorted lattice of 2D nanosheets, which is absent for 0D metallic nanoparticles, the Coulomb barrier has been overcome giving rise to active electron transfer to facilitate the water splitting process. Another work on Ru–Ni nanosheet assembly shows that eg-dz2 misalignment induced by the nanosheet structure can result in minimization of surface Coulomb repulsion and lead to a low-barrier water splitting process.55 DFT simulation is powerful in helping to understand the advantages and working mechanism of electrocatalysts. It is thereby called for more attention and efforts devoted to the theoretical calculation of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures for electrochemical water splitting.
2.6 Property evaluation metrics
HER and OER are well studied electrochemical reactions and acknowledged property evaluation standards have been set up. The electrochemical performance can be evaluated from three major aspects, that is, activity, kinetics and stability. Several important property evaluation metrics are summarized below.

(1) Current density and overpotential. 
The current density can reflect the electrode's catalytic activity, which is usually obtained by cyclic voltammetry (CV) or linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) scan. It is acquired by normalizing the obtained current to the geometric surface area of the electrode with a unit of mA cm−2. Sometimes, the mass current is used for comparison in the literature especially for precious metal-based electrocatalysts with a unit of mA g−1. One has to take care when using CV or LSV to obtain the current density as non-faradaic current may also contribute to the total current we measured. In this case, the current density we obtained cannot reflect the actual activity of the electrocatalyst. A more reliable manner is to measure the steady-state current change with time at different applied potentials. For the comparison of catalytic activities of different materials, overpotential, at which the current density reaches a certain value, is often used. For HER and OER, the overpotential corresponding to a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (the current density for a solar water-splitting device with 12.3% efficiency) is usually adopted to compare different materials’ catalytic activities.


(2) Tafel slope. 
The Tafel slope can reflect the reaction kinetics of the electrochemical reaction over an electrocatalyst. It indicates the overpotential increment to increase the current density by a factor of ten. The Tafel slope can be obtained from the linear portion of the Tafel plot by fitting with the Tafel equation:η = a + blogjwhere η is the overpotential, a is a constant which is related to the electrode properties, electrolyte and temperature, b is the Tafel slope, and j is the current density. The Tafel slope can help with the elucidation of the reaction mechanism and determination of the rate-determining step. Regarding an electrochemical reaction, the rate-determining step as well as the nature (electrochemical or chemical) and number of reaction steps determines the Tafel slope. From the Tafel slope value, we can tell whether the rate-determining step involves electron transfer (electrochemical reaction) or not (chemical reaction). Besides, the number of electrochemical and chemical steps involved in the reaction can also be determined from the Tafel slope. From the Tafel equation, another important parameter, namely the exchange current density (j0), can also be acquired by assuming η to be zero, which reflects the intrinsic activity of an electrocatalyst under equilibrium conditions. An electrochemical material that possesses a small Tafel slope b and a large exchange current density j0 is preferred. A smaller Tafel slope indicates higher increment in the current density with the same overpotential increase, implying faster reaction kinetics.


(3) Turnover frequency (TOF). 
TOF is defined as the number of reactant molecules reacting at each active site in unit time at a certain potential. TOF can be calculated by the following equation:  where j is the current density, S the area of the working electrode, n the number of moles of the electrocatalyst, and F the Faraday constant (F = 96485 C mol−1). TOF is a parameter that can reflect the intrinsic activity of a catalyst but it is hard to get a precise TOF value because of the difficulty in obtaining the precise number of active sites. For heterogeneous catalysts, they usually possess easily accessible active sites and inaccessible catalytic species. The TOF value can be calculated based on either the easily accessible active sites or the total catalytic species (including accessible and inaccessible active sites). Neither of them can achieve the actual TOF value but it is a reasonable estimation of the TOF value especially for similar electrocatalysts.


(4) Faradaic efficiency (FE). 
The Faradaic efficiency (FE) is a measure of the utilization efficiency of electrons toward the desired product for a specific electrochemical reaction. The FE could be acquired by calculating the ratio between the experimentally obtained product and the theoretically generated product with the total charge. It is worth noting that the FE for either HER or OER is not 100% despite the fact that H2 or O2 is the only product. The non-faradaic capacitive current may also contribute to the total measured current. For HER and OER, the FE is rarely used to evaluate the electrochemical performance.


(5) Stability. 
For HER and OER, the electrocatalysts work under harsh reductive or oxidative conditions. Long-term stability is an important parameter in evaluating the electrochemical performance of a high-efficiency electrocatalyst especially for practical application. One method of stability test is to perform CV or LSV scan for some cycles in a certain voltage range. However, a more reliable method is to perform the i–t test at a constant potential (chronoamperometry) or the V–t test at a constant current density (chronopotentiometry).

3. Synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures
Metallic nanoparticles are common material structures during solution-based chemical synthesis because metal atoms naturally tend to form three-dimensional close-packed structures. The difficult synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic structures has hindered the exploration of new and intrinsic electrochemical properties. With the development of nanotechnology and in-depth understanding of low-dimensional nanostructures, diversified methods have been developed for the synthesis of different 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures such as organic ligand-assisted synthesis, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, carbon monoxide confined growth, topotactic reduction, and templated growth as summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the synthesis methods for 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures




Methods
Metallic nanocrystals
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Organic ligand-assisted synthesis
Pt–M NWs (M = Ni, Co, Fe)
Diversified nanostructures; facile operation
Usually expensive organic precursors required

27



Pt/PtxPb core/shell NWs

29



Ru–Ni NSs

55



Hierarchical Pt–Co NWs

123



Thread-like Pt–Cu NWs

124



Ultrathin Rh NSs

125



PtPb hexagonal nanoplates

126



Rh hexagonal NSs

127



RuCu nanotubes

28



Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis
Rh NSs
Simple setup; facile operation; large-scale synthesis
Usually requires surfactants affecting catalytic performance; limited products (non-metallics)

30



PtCu alloy NSs

33



PdPt NWs

7



Rh NS assemblies

31



Ru NSs

128



Carbon monoxide confined growth
Pd NSs
Easy to obtain high-quality 2D nanosheets
Limited to 2D nanostructures; release of toxic CO

32



Rh NSs

129



PdNi NSs

25



PdPtAg NSs

130



PdCu NSs

8



Ru NSs

131



Rh NSs

30



PtCu alloy NSs

132



Topotactic reduction
Lamellar Ni NSs
Easy to produce a 2D nanostructure array; large-scale synthesis
Limited to 2D nanostructures; mostly on non-precious metallic nanostructures; application limited to alkaline electrolytes

34



NiCo NS array

35



NiMo NSs

9



CoFe NSs

133



CoFePt NSs

134



Bi NSs

135



Templated growth
Ni NWs
Diversified nanostructures benefiting from the template
Complicated synthesis procedures

136



Rh NWs

137



4H/fcc Au@PdAg NRBs

6



Au square sheets

36



Pd@Au nanoplates

138



Ag@Pt nanoplates

139



Au@AuAg yolk–shell NSs

140



Au@Pd core–shell nanoplates

141





3.1 Organic ligand-assisted synthesis
The organic ligand-assisted synthesis in this work refers to a reaction occurring in a single or mixed organic solvent(s) containing well-dispersed metal precursors and reductants. The organic solvent(s) consists of long carbon-chain molecules which can coordinate with metal ions/atoms and modulate the metallic nanocrystal growth. The organic ligand-assisted synthesis, as a typical solution-based synthetic method, can allow facile control of solvents, precursors, reductants and temperature, bringing much opportunities for controlled metallic nanocrystal growth. The metal precursor(s) (at least one organic metal precursor) is well dispersed in the organic solvent which facilitates the synthesis of high-quality metallic nanostructures. Oleylamine (OAm) is one of the most frequently used organic solvents for organic ligand-assisted synthesis which also serves as a surfactant and reductant. Practically, OAm is often used together with another organic solvent (oleic acid, 1-octadecene, diphenyl ether, etc.) forming a mixed solvent to control the growth orientation and morphology of the metallic nanostructures. With OAm as the organic solvent (also as a surfactant and reductant), various metallic nanostructures have been prepared, including 1D NWs (e.g., Pt-based NWs24,27,29,123,124,142–145) and 2D NSs/nanoplates (e.g., Ru–Ni NSs,55 Rh NSs125,127 and Pt–Pb nanoplates126). For instance, hierarchical high-index Pt–Co NWs with Pt-rich facets and an ordered intermetallic structure were synthesized by our group (Fig. 3a) using platinum acetylacetonate (Pt(acac)2) and cobalt(III)acetylacetonate (Co(acac)3) as the metal precursors in OAm.123 Ultrathin Rh NSs (1.3 nm in thickness) were prepared by Jang et al. with [Rh(CO)2Cl]2 as the precursor and OAm as the solvent at 50 °C for 10 days with no stirring (Fig. 3b).125 It was proposed that the chain structure of Rh+ formed by the metal–metal interaction is coordinated with OAm first and then lamellar structures are formed by the coordinated chains via van der Waals forces. The reduction of Rh+ to Rh finally leads to the formation of Rh NSs.
 Fig. 3  (a) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron miscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of hierarchical Pt–Co NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM image of Rh NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of Pt–Pb nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. TEM images of (d) Cu nanocubes, (e) Cu NWs, and (f) RuCu NTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As mentioned above, the addition of a second organic solvent, acting as a capping and structure-directing agent, is regarded as an important strategy to effectively tune the growth of metallic nanostructures. Pt–Pb hexagonal nanoplates were prepared by our group (Fig. 3c) with the combined use of OAm and 1-octadecene (ODE) as the solvent.126 Control experiments show that both OAm and ODE are indispensable for the synthesis of Pt–Pb nanoplates. Cubic nanocrystals or aggregated nanoparticles are formed in the presence of only OAm or ODE, respectively. Another example is the synthesis of Rh nanocrystals where by varying the volume ratio of OAm to ODE the morphology of Rh can be tuned from tetrahedra (only OAm) to concave tetrahedra (OAm/ODE = 1) and to nanosheets (OAm/ODE = 1.5).127 Besides the aforementioned organic structure-directing agents, other factors such as precursors, reductants, small molecules and temperature all can significantly influence the growth orientation and morphology of synthesized metallic nanocrystals.126,143 This, although making the control of metallic nanocrystal growth complicated, provides a platform for tuning the structure and morphology of metallic nanostructures. Huang et al. showed that Cu nanocubes (Fig. 3d) are obtained from the precursor of Cu(acac)2 in OAm with the addition of small molecules of NH4Cl while Cu NWs (Fig. 3e) are synthesized if NH4Cl is replaced by RuCl3·H2O at 170 °C for 3 h. If the temperature is further increased to 210 °C and maintained at 210 °C for 12 h following the synthesis of Cu NWs, Ru is reduced and RuCu nanotubes (NTs) are formed finally (Fig. 3f).28 This example has clearly demonstrated the role of small molecules and temperature in influencing the structure of metallic nanocrystals. For the synthesis of Pt–Pb nanoplates, if the reducing agent of ascorbic acid (AA) is replaced by glucose or critic acid, no hexagonal Pt–Pb nanoplates can be obtained.126 From the discussion above, we can see that organic ligand-assisted synthesis has provided unprecedented opportunities for obtaining diversified 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures under optimized synthetic conditions.
3.2 Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis
Hydrothermal or solvothermal synthesis is a simple and facile method of synthesizing nanomaterials. The solvent solution containing a well-dispersed precursor, reducing agent and surfactant is transferred to an autoclave and the reaction proceeds at elevated temperature and high pressure. Under high temperature and high pressure, reactions that cannot proceed under normal conditions may easily occur and unique material structures may be obtained. Typically, water, an organic solvent, or a mixture of them is used as the reaction medium. By controlling factors like solvent, precursor, surfactant, reductant, temperature, reaction time and pH value, people can obtain a wide spectrum of nanomaterials with controlled morphology, growth orientation, crystallinity, size, etc. The hydrothermal or solvothermal method has been widely used for the synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanomaterials. For example, by a facile solvothermal method Duan et al. synthesized single-layer Rh NSs using a mixture of benzyl alcohol and formaldehyde as the solvent and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) as the surfactant.30 The thickness of the synthesized Rh NSs is less than 4 Å and structure analysis indicates that the Rh NSs consist of planar single-atom layered sheets of Rh. The surfactant PVP plays an essential role in the synthesis and stabilization of Rh NSs. DFT calculation reveals that a δ-bonding framework exists that stabilizes single-layer Rh NSs together with PVP. PtCu alloy NSs were synthesized using a solvothermal method by heating a mixture of Pt(acac)2, Cu(acac)2, PVP and KI in formamide.33 It was found that I− ions are crucial for the synthesis of PtCu NSs. The I− ions can tune the reduction kinetics of Pt and reduce Cu2+ to Cu1+ forming CuI. The in situ formed CuI was believed to play an important role in the synthesis. PdPt NWs were hydrothermally synthesized using dioctadecyldimethylammonium chloride (DODAC) as the template and AA as the reductant in water.7 Other examples include Rh NS assemblies,31 free-standing Ru NSs,128etc.
3.3 Carbon monoxide confined growth
Carbon monoxide (CO) confined growth is a synthesis method developed on the basis of solution-based chemical synthesis by introducing CO as the surface confining agent. It is very effective in synthesizing 2D metallic nanostructures, and various 2D metallic NSs have been obtained with this method including Pd,32,146–148 Rh,129 PtCu,33 PdNi,25 PdPtAg,130etc. Metals are non-layered materials and metal atoms prefer to form three-dimensional (3D) close-packed structures but not 2D NS-like structures. A strong confining force is required to achieve the anisotropic growth of metals and CO can strongly adsorb on the metal surface working as an effective surface confining agent. For the typical synthesis of 2D metallic NSs by CO confined growth, a homogeneous solution with uniformly distributed metal precursors, reductant, surfactant and even small molecules is prepared first. The homogeneous solution is then charged with CO to a certain pressure (e.g., 1 bar) and heated to a certain temperature. After being maintained at the temperature for some time, the metallic NSs are finally obtained. One of the most typical examples is the preparation of hexagonal Pd NSs (Fig. 4a) by Zheng and coworkers.32 Palladium acetylacetonate (Pd(acac)2), PVP and a halide salt were firstly dissolved in a solvent such as dimethylformamide (DMF) and the homogeneous solution was then transferred to a glass vessel. After charging the glass vessel with CO to 1 bar, the solution was heated to 100 °C and maintained at 100 °C for 3 h with stirring. Finally, a dark blue solution with hexagonal Pd NSs was obtained. CO was believed to play a critical role in achieving the growth of Pd NSs as only twinned nanoparticles were obtained without CO. It was proposed that CO molecules can strongly adsorb on the basal (111) plane of newly formed Pd NSs and prevent further deposition of metal atoms on the (111) plane, leading to anisotropic growth of Pd and the formation of nanosheets. The strong confinement effect of CO has restricted the thickness of Pd NSs to less than 10 atomic layers (1.8 nm) and the edge length can be tuned by controlling the reaction time. Following this report, many other metallic NSs have been synthesized, such as the 3D binary PdCu alloy NSs (Fig. 4b),8 ternary PdPtAg alloy NSs (Fig. 4c),130 and Rh NSs (Fig. 4d).129 Besides directly using CO as the capping agent to synthesize metallic NSs, people have developed another effective approach for the synthesis of metallic NSs, that is, using formaldehyde or carbonyl compounds as the reducing agent. By this approach, Rh NSs,30 Ru NSs131 and PtCu alloy NSs132 have been successfully prepared. During the high-temperature reaction, formaldehyde or carbonyl compounds would decompose and produce CO. The released CO may be involved in the growth of 2D metallic NSs.
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Pd NSs using NBu4Br as the structure-directing agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of PdCu alloy NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) TEM image of PdPtAg NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) TEM image of Rh NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.4 Topotactic reduction
Topotactic reduction is a facile method of preparing 2D metallics. Generally, a 2D transition metal hydroxide or oxide is grown on a substrate such as Ni foam first by the hydrothermal method. Next, the synthesized hydroxide or oxide precursors are converted to the corresponding metallic nanostructures by well controlling the reducing conditions. This method is widely used for the preparation of transition metal nanostructures as it is challenging to directly synthesize 2D metallic nanostructures. In this regard, Sun's group have achieved the growth of various 2D metallic nanostructures by topotactic reduction. For example, single-crystalline Ni NSs with a lamellar structure and a thickness of only several atomic layers were prepared by topotactic reduction of Ni(OH)2 precursors (Fig. 5a).34 First, Ni salts were precipitated on nickel foam in aqueous solution induced by hexamethylene tetramine hydrolysis upon hydrothermal treatment.149 Next, the obtained Ni(OH)2 NS array was solvothermally reduced to a Ni NS array in ethylene glycol containing NaOH (Fig. 5b and c). TEM analysis shows that the thickness of the Ni(OH)2 nanowall is about 5–6 nm while the Ni NS is as thin as 2.2 nm (10 atomic layers) with an exposed (111) facet. With the same method, the same group also prepared a NiCo NS array by coprecipitation of Ni and Co salts followed by topotactic conversion. The NiCo NS is 2.5 nm thick and the composition can be tuned by facilely controlling the concentration of Ni and Co salts.35 Ultrathin NiMo NSs were also prepared by the same in situ topotactic reduction method (Fig. 5d).9 Precursor NiMoO4 NSs were firstly grown on conductive Ni foam by a hydrothermal method. The NiMoO4 NSs were then in situ transformed to NiMo NSs in ethylene glycol assisted by NaOH and NaBH4 by a solvothermal method (Fig. 5e and f). For topotactic reduction, the reduction kinetics has to be well controlled to avoid self-nucleation, which is achieved by controlling the reaction temperature and the amount of NaOH and NaBH4. The topotactic reduction method has been adopted for the fabrication of other 2D metallic NSs such as CoFe,133 CoFePt,134 and Bi.135
 Fig. 5  (a) A scheme showing the fabrication of Ni NSs from topotactic reduction of Ni(OH)2. SEM images of (b) Ni(OH)2 and (c) Ni NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of topotactic conversion of NiMoO4 to NiMo NSs. SEM images of (e) NiMoO4 and (f) NiMo NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.5 Templated growth
Templated growth is to confine the growth of metals along a specific direction or dimension by selecting a suitable template. With the assistance of a template, it is relatively easy to achieve the growth of metallic nanostructures, either 1D or 2D, which are difficult to be fabricated by other methods. For 1D metallic nanostructure growth, one of the most popular templates is the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO), the diameter and density of the perpendicularly aligned pore channel of which can be facilely tuned. With AAO as the template, a wide range of metallic NWs have been prepared with tuned diameter and length for different applications.136,137,150 For example, Wu et al. fabricated Ni NWs by direct-current (dc) electrodeposition with AAO as the template (Fig. 6a).136 A Rh NW array was prepared by electrodeposition using AAO as the template (Fig. 6b).137 The morphology of the Rh NWs (coarse or smooth) can be tuned by controlling the electrode potential or the concentration of the precursor. Other mesoporous materials are also adopted for the fabrication of nanomaterials utilizing the space confining effect. Bhaumik and coworkers synthesized ultrasmall Ag nanoparticles with the assistance of Santa Barbara Amorphous-15 (SBA-15) type mesoporous organosilica material.151 Wormhole-like mesoporous SnO2 was used to confine the growth of IrO2 and Pt nanoparticles to obtain high-performance water splitting electrocatalysts.152 Fan et al. synthesized a series of Au-based multimetallic nanoribbons (NRBs) using 4H/face-centered cubic (fcc) Au@Ag as the template (Fig. 6c).6 It is quite difficult to directly synthesize Au-based multimetallic NRBs because of the difference of the reduction kinetics of noble metal precursors. In the work by Fan et al., unique bimetallic 4H/fcc Au@Ag core–shell NRBs were synthesized first by a wet chemical method using 4H Au NRBs as the template (Fig. 6d). Then the corresponding metal precursors were homogeneously mixed with the 4H/fcc Au@Ag NRBs to produce different multimetallic NRBs including 4H/fcc Au@PdAg, Au@PtAg, and Au@PtPdAg NRBs. This is the first time that noble metal alloys with 4H hexagonal structure are achieved. 2D templates are also adopted for the fabrication of 2D metallic nanostructures. 2D templates can restrict the growth of metals on the template surface but not along the third direction. One typical example is the fabrication of Au square sheets (AuSS) using graphene oxide (GO) sheets as the 2D template. Huang et al. fabricated AuSS (Fig. 6e) by heating HAuCl4, GO sheets, 1-amino-9-octadecene and CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)8NH2 dispersed in a mixed solution of hexane and ethanol (Fig. 6f).36 The edge length of the AuSS is about 200–500 nm with a thickness of about 2.4 nm. More importantly, the structure of the prepared AuSS is exclusively hexagonal close-packed (hcp) and this is the first in situ fabrication of hcp Au. The hcp AuSS is stable under ambient conditions but transforms to fcc Au under exposure to the electron beam during TEM analysis. Other 2D metallic nanostructures prepared by templated growth include Pd@Au nanoplates,138 Ag@Pt,139 Au@AuAg yolk–shell NSs,140 Au@Pd core–shell rhombic nanoplates,141etc.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Ni NWs by dc pulse electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2009, Elsevier Inc. (b) SEM image of Rh NWs by electrochemical deposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI). (c) Schematic illustration of the growth of 4H/fcc Au@PdAg, Au@PtAg, and Au@PtPdAg NRBs using 4H/fcc Au@Ag NRBs as the template. (d) High-resolution TEM image of 4H/fcc Au@PdAg NRBs showing the alternating 4H and fcc structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of Au square sheets grown on the GO surface. The inset represents crystal models for an Au sheet. (f) Schematic illustration of the growth of Au sheets on the GO surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
4. Strategies toward advanced 1D and 2D metallics for electrochemical water splitting
Although 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures with distinctive characteristics have already shown remarkable electrochemical properties compared to their bulk counterparts, effective strategies can be adopted to further enhance their catalytic performance. As discussed in Section 2.4, the electrochemical performance of a catalyst is strongly correlated to the electronic structures of its surface atoms, which determine the interaction with the reactants and intermediates. Therefore, the strategies that can tune the electronic structures would help achieve optimized and enhanced catalytic performance, such as alloying, structure design, surface engineering, interface engineering and strain engineering as discussed below and listed in Tables 4 and 5.
Table 4 Summary of the HER performance of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures




Catalyst
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Stability
Ref.




Ru3Ni3 NAs
1 M KOH
39
26.9
10 h at 5 mA cm−2

55



Ru3Ni3 NAs
0.5 M H2SO4
39
53.9
12 h at 5 mA cm−2

55



2D PtCu NSs
0.05 M H2SO4
55 at 100 mA cm−2
N.A.
5000 cycles

33



2D PtAgCo NSs
0.5 M H2SO4
400 mV at 705 mA cm−2
27
5000 cycles

153



2D Ni–Mo alloy NSs
1 M KOH
35
45
1000 cycles

9



RuCu NSs
1 M KOH
20
15.3
N.A.

26



RuCu NSs
0.5 M H2SO4
19
27.3
N.A.

26



a-RuTe2 PNRs
1 M KOH
36
36
N.A.

46



a-RuTe2 PNRs
0.5 M H2SO4
33
35
N.A.

46



Ni-BDT-A
1 M KOH
80
70
20 h at 20 mA cm−2

47



Pt3.6Ni–S NWs
1 M KOH
70 at 66.9 mA cmdisk−2
114.8
N.A.

154



Pt–Ni NWs/NiOx
1 M KOH
40
N.A.
3 h at −0.07 V (vs. RHE)

24



Pt3Ni2 NWs–S
1 M KOH
70 at 37.2 mA cm−2
N.A.
5 h at 5 mA cm−2

48



Ru2Ni2 SNs
1 M KOH
40
23.4
N.A.

13



Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2
1 M KOH
70 at 2.48 mA cm−2
N.A.
4000 s

49



Pd NSs 5 ML
0.1 M HClO4
49 at 5 mA cm−2
N.A.
N.A.

41





Table 5 Summary of the OER performance of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures




Catalyst
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Stability
Ref.




Ru3Ni3 NAs
1 M KOH
304
91.7
10 h at 5 mA cm−2

55



Ru3Ni3 NAs
0.5 M H2SO4
252
45.8
10 h at 5 mA cm−2

55



Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs
1 M KOH
257
51
40 h at 10 mA cm−2

38



RuCu NSs
1 M KOH
234
41.2
21.5 h at 5 mA cm−2

26



RuCu NSs
0.5 M H2SO4
236
40.4
13.5 h at 5 mA cm−2

26



Ir superstructure
1 M KOH
∼240
32.7
N.A.

45



Ir superstructure
0.1 M HClO4
270
46.6
8 h at 2.5 mA cm−2

45



a-RuTe2 PNRs
1 M KOH
285
62
N.A.

46



a-RuTe2 PNRs
0.5 M H2SO4
245
47
N.A.

46





4.1 Alloying
Alloying is a generally used approach for the enhancement and optimization of electrochemical performance of catalysts.155–158 This strategy has been proved to be very effective in diversified electrocatalysis reactions, such as oxygen reduction, N2 reduction, CO2 reduction and water splitting.123,158–164 The main principle of alloying is to modulate the electronic structures of surface and near surface atoms of an electrocatalyst (for example, the d-band center position), thus optimizing the adsorption/desorption strength of adsorbates on the catalyst surface and improving the electrochemical properties. For instance, alloying of Mo–Ni–Fe has resulted in superior OER properties (with an overpotential of 257 mV at 10 mA cm−2) over the binary counterparts and commercial IrO2.38 Compared to the binary Mo–Ni alloy, the addition of Fe modifies the electronic structures and lowers the d-band center position. The adsorbate (OH*, O*, and OOH*) binding strength is therefore optimized which is the main reason for the excellent OER performance. Besides property enhancement, the alloying strategy can even change the reaction pathways of catalytic reactions leading to different reduction products (e.g., CO2 reduction). The reason also lies in that the interaction strength of different intermediates with the catalyst can be significantly altered by alloying and composition optimization.
For precious metallic materials, alloying with non-precious metals (e.g., Fe, Co and Ni) can reduce the use of high-cost precious metals besides improving the electrochemical performance. Based on the Sabatier principle, the performance and composition of the alloyed metallic nanostructures often follows a volcano relationship. Take the precious ruthenium (Ru) as an example. Ru is often alloyed with other transition metals such as Ni to form 2D metallic NSs to get optimized and improved HER and OER performance. Our group fabricated 3D hierarchical Ru–Ni nanosheet assemblies (NAs) via organic ligand-assisted synthesis for pH-universal water splitting (Fig. 7).55 The 3D Ru–Ni NAs are composed of substantial 2D NSs (Fig. 7a and b) which can largely expose the active sites. EDS mapping analysis revealed that the 3D Ru–Ni NAs consist of a Ru–Ni alloy core and an ultrathin Ru shell (Fig. 7c). The Ru–Ni NAs have demonstrated largely enhanced electrochemical performance compared to Ru NAs and the commercial catalysts. For instance, to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for HER in 1 M KOH, overpotential values of only 39, 42 and 44 mV are required for Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs and Ru3Ni1 NAs, which are much lower than those for Ru NAs (62 mV) and Pt/C (90 mV) (Fig. 7d). The much smaller Tafel slope for Ru–Ni NAs indicates largely enhanced reaction kinetics. The Ru3Ni3 NAs show superior stability with negligible activity decay after 12000 cycles of HER in 1 M KOH. Besides, the Ru–Ni NAs also show enhanced HER performance in acidic electrolytes. Regarding the OER performance, the Ru–Ni NAs also outperform the Ru NAs and commercial Ir/C. In 0.5 M H2SO4, the Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs and Ru3Ni1 NAs require an overpotential of 252 mV, 260 mV and 268 mV, respectively, to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, much lower than that for the benchmark OER catalyst Ir/C (328 mV) (Fig. 7e). The Tafel slope for the Ru–Ni NAs is smaller than that for commercial Ir/C and Ru NAs, indicating faster reaction kinetics. The stability test shows that the Ru3Ni3 NAs can maintain high activity for 10 h for OER in 0.5 M H2SO4. In addition, the Ru3Ni3 NAs perform better than commercial Ir/C–Pt/C for full water splitting from the aspects of overpotential and reaction kinetics except in 0.1 M KOH. All the above results demonstrate that alloying Ru with Ni has significantly enhanced the electrochemical performance of Ru. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis shows that high oxidation states of Ru (Ru4+ and Rux+, x > 4) and Ni (Ni3+) are formed during the thermal treatment in air, which synergistically contribute to the high OER performance. Of note, the high oxidation state Ni3+ favors the formation of NiOOH which helps enhance the OER performance. Surface valence-band photoemission spectra analysis indicates that alloying with Ni has caused downshift of the d-band center of Ru–Ni NAs compared to Ru NAs, leading to suitable bonding strength between the adsorbates and Ru–Ni NAs and therefore enhanced HER activity (Fig. 7f). DFT calculations indicate that the mutually restricted d-band interaction has lowered the binding of (Ru, Ni) with (H, O) leading to easier H–H and O–O formation. A barrier-free water-splitting process can be achieved because of the minimization of surface Coulomb repulsion resulting from the structure-induced eg-dz2 misalignment (Fig. 7g).
 Fig. 7  (a) and (b) HAADF-STEM image of Ru3Ni3 NAs. (c) HAADF-STEM image and EDS mapping of Ru3Ni3 NAs. (d) HER polarization curves of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs, Ru NAs, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (e) OER polarization curves of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs, Ru NAs, and Ir/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Surface valence-band photoemission spectra of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs and Ru NAs. (g) A scheme showing the electron transition from the t2g orbital to the eg orbital and the intermediate's spin state transition on the Ru–Ni(100) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, Cell Press. 
Alloying with cheaper transition metals has often been adopted to improve the water splitting properties as well as reduce the use of high-cost precious metals such as Pt. Zheng and coworkers synthesized PtCu alloy NSs by a hydrothermal method with CO as the capping agent (Fig. 8a and b).33 The 2D PtCu NSs have demonstrated much better HER performance in 0.05 M H2SO4 than commercial Pt/C and PtCu nanoparticles (NPs) (Fig. 8c). An overpotential of 55 mV was required for PtCu NSs to achieve a current density of 100 mA cm−2 but it was 72 and 111 mV for PtCu NPs and Pt/C, respectively. The enhanced HER property of PtCu NSs was attributed to the ultrathin 2D nanostructure and alloying effect. Wang's group prepared PtAgCo NSs by an oxidative etching strategy of stacking faults (Fig. 8d and e) and found that the edge thickness of PtAgCo NSs can be tuned by controlling the composition.153 Correspondingly, the PtAgCo NSs with different edge thicknesses have shown different HER performances. Compared to the PtAg NSs, further alloying with Co has led to significantly enhanced HER activity (Fig. 8f). The PtAgCo NSs with a medium ratio of Co and edge thickness show the highest HER activity with a high current density of 705 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 400 mV. The sample with medium Co composition has shown the highest electrochemical surface area among all the samples, which is beneficial to the HER process. The incorporation of Co has also largely modified the electronic structure of Pt and caused the downshift of the d-band center of Pt. This in turn has weakened the adsorption of H on Pt and thus facilitated the HER process.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image with size distribution (inset) and (b) HRTEM image of PtCu alloy NSs. (c) HER polarization curves of Pt black, PtCu NP and PtCu NS measured in 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PtAg and PtAgCo NSs. (e) TEM image of PtAgCo NSs and (f) HER polarization curves of Pt/C, AgCo, PtAg and PtAgCo in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Alloying between non-precious transition metals can sometimes bring about a strong synergistic effect, dramatically modifying the electronic structure of each component. The binding strength of the adsorbates on the alloy surface could therefore be optimized, giving rise to drastically enhanced electrochemical performance which even outperforms that of precious metals. For example, Mo-based nanobelts (NBs) were prepared via a solvothermal method for OER in an alkaline electrolyte by our group (Fig. 9a and b).38 The OER performance of Mo–Ni or Mo–Fe NBs is inferior to that of the benchmark OER catalyst IrO2. When both Ni and Fe are incorporated into the NBs, however, the Mo–Ni–Fe NBs show excellent OER activity in 1 M KOH, even outperforming the commercial IrO2 (Fig. 9c). Furthermore, the OER activity of Mo–Ni–Fe NBs can be optimized by tuning the ratio of Fe in the NBs with Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs showing the best performance. The overpotential for Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is 257 mV, much lower than that of IrO2 (330 mV). The Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs can maintain high activity for 40 h while the activity of IrO2 rapidly decays in 1 M KOH. The comparison of surface valence band photoemission spectra of Mo51Ni40Fe9 and Mo55Ni45 NBs shows downshift of the d-band center with the addition of Fe into Mo–Ni NBs. It indicates weakened adsorption of oxygen related intermediates (OH*, O* and OOH*). Therefore, it was proposed that the highest activity of Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs was attributed to the optimal d-band center position and binding strength with intermediates. XPS analysis indicates that Ni2+ plays a critical role in influencing the OER activity of Mo–Ni–Fe NBs. The increase of the ratio of Ni2+/Ni3+ leads to a decrease of the overpotential.
 Fig. 9  (a) HAADF-STEM and (b) TEM images for the Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs. (c) LSV curves for commercial IrO2 and Mo-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of the Ni–Mo nanosheet obtained by topotactic reduction. The inset TEM image shows the thickness of the Ni–Mo nanosheet. (e) HER polarization curves and (f) Nyquist plots of the NiMoO4 precursor, Ni foam, Ni–Mo nanosheets, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another example is the Ni–Mo alloy, which has been widely acknowledged as an excellent HER catalyst in alkaline electrolytes because of the similar surface electronic state to Pt.39,40 By composition optimization and morphology design, the Ni–Mo alloy can even outperform the state-of-the-art HER catalyst Pt. Through in situ topotactic reduction, Sun et al. prepared an ultrathin Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet array for HER in an alkaline electrolyte.9 The NiMoO4 precursor array was first synthesized under hydrothermal conditions and then reduced to the Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet array with a thickness of 2.0 nm (Fig. 9d). An overpotential of only 35 mV was needed for the Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which represents an ultra-low value among all reported HER electrocatalysts in alkaline conditions (Fig. 9e). This overpotential value of 35 mV is much lower than that of Pt/C. At higher potentials, the current density increase is even faster than that of Pt/C. Above the overpotential of 150 mV, the Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet shows a higher TOF value than Pt/C indicating much higher intrinsic HER activity than Pt/C, which may be attributed to the proper surface electronic structures. Through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis, the Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet was found to show a small charge transfer resistance of only 0.8 Ω, smaller than that of Pt/C (1.3 Ω) (Fig. 9f). The small resistance has led to much faster electron transfer during the HER process. From the above two examples, we can clearly see the power of alloying in the design of high-performance OER and HER electrocatalysts. It is expected that other high-activity electrocatalysts could be designed by proper alloying of non-precious transition metals to reduce the use of the expensive precious metals.
4.2 Structure design
Special structure design is also an effective strategy for constructing highly efficient electrocatalysts. The special structure can often intrinsically change the electronic structures of a catalyst, giving rise to significantly improved electrochemical performance. A ready example is the channel-rich RuCu nanosheets with lattice distortion near the channel region for enhanced electrochemical water splitting. The channel-rich RuCu snowflake-like nanosheets (Fig. 10a) were synthesized by a facile organic ligand-assisted synthesis method for pH-universal water splitting.26 The RuCu NSs are composed of crystalline Ru and amorphous Cu with rich accessible channels (Fig. 10b). The channel-rich RuCu NSs have exhibited enhanced electrochemical HER, OER and overall water splitting performance in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes compared to RuCu nanoparticles (NPs) and commercial catalysts. The overpotentials (at 10 mA cm−2) and Tafel slopes of RuCu NSs for both HER and OER are much smaller than those of RuCu NPs, commercial Ir/C and Pt/C, indicating much higher electrochemical activity and faster reaction kinetics. For instance, to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2, RuCu NSs require an overpotential of only 20, 40, 19 and 27 mV in 1 M KOH, 0.1 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.05 M H2SO4, smaller than those of Pt/C (60, 67, 24 and 30 mV) (Fig. 10c). For overall water splitting, a cell voltage of 1.49, 1.55, 1.49 and 1.50 V is required for a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH, 0.1 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.05 M H2SO4, respectively, much smaller than those of Ir/C‖Pt/C (1.56, 1.66, 1.56 and 1.57 V). XPS analysis indicates that Ru4+ and Ru0 are the active species for OER and HER, respectively. DFT calculations indicate that the rich channel character has facilitated the water splitting process. It is revealed that the formation of rich channels has induced lattice distortion near the channel region. The induced short-range disorder can help minimize the intermediating energetic cost of bond-dissociation with lattice relaxation. Furthermore, the strong t2g–eg splitting effect at Ru sites is largely attenuated near the channel region which can therefore lead to active electron-transfer by overcoming the Coulomb barrier. It has to be mentioned that, besides the structural merits of RuCu NSs, the synergistic effect between Ru and Cu cannot be neglected. It was proposed that the incorporation of Cu may have helped the optimization of the electronic structure for enhanced OER performance. DFT calculations also show that Cu 3d bands display a more electron-rich trend when the position is closer to the channel region, which can help the stabilization of Ru0, alleviation of the over-binding effect, and smooth electron transfer between Ru and adsorbates. Besides the channel-rich RuCu NSs, a 3D ultrathin laminar Ir superstructure was designed and synthesized by an efficient solution method for OER in a broad pH range by our group (Fig. 10d).45 The 3D Ir superstructure is composed of 2D ultrathin Ir nanosheets with a thickness around 1.3 nm. The Ir superstructure has exhibited superior OER performance in a wide pH range of electrolytes from 1 M KOH to 0.5 M HClO4 (Fig. 10e). The surface-clean 3D Ir superstructure (grown on carbon directly during synthesis) needs an overpotential of ∼240 and 270 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH (Fig. 10f) and 0.1 M HClO4, respectively, making it among the most active OER catalysts. The high activity of the 3D Ir superstructure might be attributed to the structural characteristics, such as 3D accessible sites, proper layer distance, ultrathin nanosheets and maximized surface area.
 Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM images of RuCu NSs. (c) HER polarization curves for RuCu NSs, RuCu NPs, Ir/C and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the 3D Ir superstructure. (e) Schematic illustration of the 3D Ir superstructure used for alkaline and acidic OER. (f) OER polarization curves for surface-clean 3D Ir, 3D Ir, Ir NPs and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Amorphization can produce abundant dangling bonds and defects in materials, which may provide more active sites to achieve superior electrochemical properties.18 For example, amorphization by lithium-incorporation has activated the electrochemically inert layered Pd3P2S8 crystal to achieve significantly enhanced HER activity.165 Therefore, the design and fabrication of amorphous metallic nanostructures would produce new highly efficient electrocatalysts for water splitting. Guided by theoretical calculations, amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods with a bullet-like outline were designed and synthesized through a facile hydrothermal process for efficient water splitting (Fig. 11a–c).46 The as-synthesized amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods were annealed under different conditions to produce amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods (a-RuTe2 PNRs) and crystalline RuTe2 porous nanorods (c-RuTe2 PNRs). The a-RuTe2 PNRs were demonstrated to possess much higher electrochemical activity than c-RuTe2 PNRs and commercial catalysts (Ir/C and Pt/C) towards water splitting in either acidic or alkaline electrolytes. For instance, a low overpotential of 245 mV is needed for a-RuTe2 PNRs to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for OER in 0.5 M H2SO4, much lower than that for c-RuTe2 PNRs (442 mV) and commercial Ir/C (323 mV) (Fig. 11d). The overpotential to generate a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for HER in 1 M KOH is 36, 103 and 60 mV for a-RuTe2 PNRs, c-RuTe2 PNRs and Pt/C, respectively. Regarding full water splitting, a cell voltage of only 1.52 V is needed for a-RuTe2 PNRs‖a-RuTe2 PNRs to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4, much lower than that of Ir/C‖Pt/C (Fig. 11e). The high density of defects existing in the amorphous RuTe2 PNRs (Fig. 11f and g) were believed to contribute significantly to the high OER activity. The high density of defects might have caused the distortion of Ru–Te bonds and thus exposed more active sites. A higher electrochemical surface area was observed for a-RuTe2 PNRs which represents a positive contribution to the high water splitting activity. In addition, RuOxHy species, which can facilitate the OER process, were confirmed to be formed in a-RuTe2 PNRs, which may be formed by the combination of oxygen atoms with the high density of defects. DFT calculations show that the distortion-strain effect was induced by the distinguished local short-range disorder in a-RuTe2 PNRs with a high degree of amorphization. The induced local distortion-strain effect has led to flexible bonding and abnormally sensitized the Te-pπ coupling which enhances electron transfer in a-RuTe2 PNRs by annihilating the notorious crystal-field-splitting effect (Fig. 11h). In summary, the local short-range disorder, existing in the amorphous RuTe2 PNR nanostructure, has contributed greatly to the high OER activity in a wide pH range.
 Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image, (b) XRD pattern, and (c) EDS elemental mapping of RuTe2 PNRs. (d) HER and OER polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs, Ir/C and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (e) Overall water-splitting polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs‖a-RuTe2 PNRs and Ir/C‖Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Positron lifetime spectra and (g) electron spin resonance spectra of a-RuTe2 PNRs and c-RuTe2 PNRs. (h) Schematic illustration of the electronic activity enhancement for the amorphous structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Designing unique nanostructures with special morphology, phase or composition can achieve significantly improved electrochemical performance as demonstrated by the above discussions. The working mechanism for different nanostructures toward superior water splitting properties varies with the specific catalyst. Regarding RuCu NSs, the ultrathin 2D nanosheets with highly exposed active sites, the rich channels with lattice distortion near the channel region, and the modification of electronic structures all contribute to the excellent water splitting properties.26 For the amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods, the high density of defects, the enhanced electron transfer, and the existence of RuOxHy species are the main contributing factors for achieving the superior water splitting performance over crystal RuTe2 nanorods.46 Encouraged by the achievements mentioned above, more efforts are called for the design and synthesis of unique nanostructures for better water splitting properties. In principle, efforts should be devoted to the synthesis of nanostructures with large electrochemical surface area, high density of defects, high electrical conductivity, and/or other unique characteristics.
4.3 Surface engineering
Since the electrolysis of water splitting occurs on the surface of a catalyst, the surface state of the catalyst (e.g., surface adsorbates) would directly and significantly influence the interaction between the catalyst and water molecules, which then determines the electrochemical performance of the catalyst. Especially for HER in alkaline electrolytes, where the dissociation of water molecules has drastically restricted the reaction kinetics, modification of the catalyst surface that can facilitate the dissociation of water molecules would greatly enhance the activity. In this regard, Zheng et al. fabricated ultrathin metallic Ni NSs with a trace amount of adsorbed sulfide Sadδ− on the surface for efficient HER in an alkaline electrolyte.47 Firstly, Ni(OH)2 NSs were prepared by a hydrothermal method on carbon cloth. The as-synthesized Ni(OH)2 NSs were then coordinated with 1,4-benzenedithiol (BDT) to form a coordination polymer possessing interconnected square-planar Ni(SR)4 motifs (Ni-BDT) (Fig. 12a). With metal-S motifs, the Ni-BDT NSs showed reasonable HER activity in 1 M KOH. But more interestingly, the activity of Ni-BDT dramatically increased with the increasing cycling number and remained stable after 12 h of electrochemical test. Comprehensive experimental analysis showed that an obvious structure and composition change has occurred for Ni-BDT during the deep electrochemical activation process (denoted as Ni-BDT-A). After the deep activation process, the average thickness of Ni-BDT was decreased from 16 nm to 1.4 nm (Ni-BDT-A) (Fig. 12b) and the content of S was as low as 2.7%. In situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and XPS analysis indicated that, after deep electrochemical activation, the Ni(OH)2 in Ni-BDT was completely converted to metallic Ni in Ni-BDT-A with a low content of S (2.7%) on the surface (Fig. 12c). The Ni-BDT-A, composed of metallic Ni NSs and a small amount of Sadδ−, has shown superior HER activity in 1 M KOH, requiring an overpotential of only 80 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, close to that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 12d). The ultrathin metallic Ni NSs, with a low coordination number as confirmed by X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES), were responsible for the excellent HER activity. However, the promoting effect of surface-adsorbed sulfide Sadδ− on the HER activity cannot be neglected. Control experiments have indicated that a small amount of sulfide Sadδ− on the surface of metallic Ni might have promoted the dissociation of water in the alkaline electrolyte. It was proposed that a Sadδ−-hydrated cation network was formed in the double layer which promotes the kinetically slow water dissociation step and migration of as-formed Had intermediates on the Ni surface to generate H2. The process of synthesizing Ni-BDT and its activation to form Ni-BDT-A with surface adsorbed Sadδ− is illustrated in Fig. 12e.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) Ni-BDT and (b) Ni-BDT-A. (c) Extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (EXAFS) of Ni foil, Ni-BDT and Ni-BDT-A. (d) HER polarization curves of Ni(OH)2, Ni-BDT, Ni-BDT-A and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (e) A scheme showing the synthesis of Ni-BDT and in situ electrochemical activation producing Ni-BDT-A with adsorbed Sadδ−. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Modification of the catalyst surface with sulfide has been demonstrated to be an effective strategy for improving the HER activity of a catalyst as shown by the example above. It has also been demonstrated that sulfide Sadδ− on the Au surface can promote water dissociation by stabilizing the hydrated cations via van der Waals interaction.166 Another vivid example is the ultrathin PtM (M = Ni, Co, and Fe) alloy NWs with surface sulfur modification (PtM–S NWs) for efficient alkaline HER.154 The PtM–S NWs were prepared through a hydrothermal process and sulfur was in situ introduced during the synthesis. Sulfur has played a central role in either the formation of ultrathin NWs or achieving superior HER activities. Regarding the synthesis, the sulfur has favored the growth of PtM NWs but not nanospheres and limited the NWs to be ultrathin (∼2.6 nm) (Fig. 13a). After the formation of PtM NWs, sulfur has strongly adsorbed on the surface of PtM NWs forming surface M–S bonds (Fig. 13b and c). The ultrathin PtM–S NWs have exhibited excellent HER performance under alkaline conditions because of the newly formed Pt/M–S(OH) interfaces. With the abundant atomic-level Pt/M–S(OH) interfaces, Pt3.6Ni–S NWs have exhibited the highest HER activity in 1 M KOH with a high current density of 66.9 mA cmdisk−2 at an overpotential of 70 mV (Fig. 13d) and an even higher current density of 75.3 mA cmdisk−2 is achieved for Pt6.2Ni–S NWs, which is 5.1 times that of Pt/C (14.9 mA cmdisk−2). The dramatically improved HER activity was attributed to the synergistic effect between Pt and Ni–S. The formation of NiSx sites has favored the dissociation of water molecules to produce reactive H (Volmer step), which highly accelerates the rate-limiting step of alkaline HER. The produced reactive H is then combined to generate H2 over the Pt sites. In summary, surface modification of PtM NWs by introducing S has facilitated water dissociation in the alkaline electrolyte and thus boosted the HER activity by forming surface M–S bonds.
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM image (the inset presents the statistics of the diameter of NWs) and (b) EDS mapping of PtNi–S NWs. (c) XPS spectrum of S for ultrathin PtNi–S NWs. (d) HER polarization curves for Pt/C, Pt–S, Pt3.6Ni–S, Pt2.9Co–S and Pt4.9Fe–S in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The examples above have demonstrated that surface engineering proves to be very effective in facilitating the alkaline HER process. The main working principle of surface-modification enhanced HER in alkaline electrolytes is that one component of the hybrid catalyst can significantly boost the dissociation of water molecules in alkaline electrolytes and the other component could help the combination of H intermediates to produce H2 thus improving the HER activity. The component that helps with the dissociation of water molecules (e.g., surface-adsorbed sulfide Sadδ−) can be generated during synthesis or by post-treatment. It is anticipated that more efficient alkaline HER electrocatalysts with higher activity and more durable stability could be designed by introducing more active adsorbates that accelerate the dissociation of water molecules in alkaline electrolytes and/or by employing more efficient phases that facilitate the combination of H intermediates. Since the dissociation of water molecules also dramatically limits the kinetics of acidic OER, it holds great promise to develop hybrid OER electrocatalysts based on surface engineering with one component facilitating the dissociation of water molecules and the other accelerating the combination of O intermediates for highly efficient OER in acidic electrolytes.
4.4 Interface engineering
Interface engineering has now been attracting growing attention and extensive efforts for achieving enhanced electrochemical performance. By constructing heterogeneous nanostructures, a synergistic effect may occur at the abundant nanoscale interfaces of the hybrid catalyst. For instance, the integration of Pt with metal hydroxides has significantly enhanced the HER activity in alkaline conditions because of the synergistic effect between metal hydroxides and Pt.54,167 The reason lies in that the metal hydroxides can promote the dissociation of water molecules and generate reactive hydrogen intermediates. The produced reactive hydrogen intermediates would then be adsorbed by the Pt surface and combined to produce H2 molecules. To date, various heterogeneous interfaces have been created for boosted electrochemical reactions, such as metal–metal interface, metal–metal oxide interface, metal–metal sulfide interface, metal–metal hydroxide interface and metal–metal boride.168
Creating nanoscale interfaces has now been acknowledged as an important approach for tuning and improving the water splitting properties of a catalyst, especially for noble metals. The creation of noble metal/non-noble metal based heterogeneous structures can not only enhance the water splitting properties but also reduce the usage of precious metals such as Pt. One such example is the Pt–Ni NWs/NiOx heterogeneous structures created by post-treating pristine Pt3Nix NWs in air for efficient HER in alkaline conditions.24 The pristine Pt3Nix NWs (x = 1, 2, 3, and 4) were synthesized by an organic ligand-assisted synthesis method and then annealed in air to create Pt–Ni/NiOx interfaces (Fig. 14a). Take the Pt3Ni3 NWs as an example. After being treated in air, a thin layer of NiOx was formed on the surface of Pt–Ni NWs (Fig. 14b and c), forming a unique Pt3Ni/NiOx heterostructure. The NiOx shell cannot fully cover the surface of the Pt3Ni core, creating abundant exposed interfaces between NiOx and Pt3Ni. More interestingly, the density of Pt3Ni/NiOx interfaces can be facilely tuned by controlling the composition of pristine Pt–Ni NWs, which lays a foundation for modulating the electrochemical properties. Among the different samples, Pt3Ni3 NWs treated in air with optimal Pt3Ni/NiOx interfaces have shown the best HER activity in alkaline conditions. They can deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of only 40 mV in 1 M KOH, which makes them among the most active electrocatalysts. A current density of 39.7 and 23.0 mA cm−2 was achieved for Pt3Ni3 NWs treated in air in 1 M and 0.1 M KOH, respectively, which is 11.6 and 2.8 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 14d and e). The Pt3Ni/NiOx interfaces were believed to play an indispensable role in enhancing the HER activity. The unfilled d-orbitals of Nix+ could increase the electrostatic affinity of NiOx to OH− and thus facilitate the dissociation of water molecules. The generated reactive hydrogen intermediates are then adsorbed by Pt near the interface to produce H2 molecules, which has dramatically accelerated water splitting. In a word, the NiOx shell has worked with the Pt3Ni core synergistically at the interface giving rise to efficient water splitting.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of producing different Pt3Nix NWs/C electrocatalysts by annealing under different atmospheres. (b) HAADF-STEM image of Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-air. (c) TEM image of the interface region between Pt3Ni and NiO. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) histograms of activity at 0.07 V (vs. RHE) for Pt/C, Pt3Ni3 NWs/C, Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-H2, and Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-air in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (g) TEM image of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (h) HER polarization curves for Pt/C, Pt NWs, Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 and Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (i) Normalized i–t chronoamperometric curves for Pt/C, Pt NWs, Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 and Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
As mentioned previously, the HER activity of Pt in alkaline conditions is about two orders of magnitude lower than that in acidic electrolytes although Pt is regarded as the state-of-the-art HER catalyst.53,169 Metal hydroxides such as Ni(OH)2 can promote the dissociation of water producing reactive hydrogen intermediate Had in alkaline conditions. Therefore, constructing hybrid materials composed of Pt and metal hydroxides might be a potential approach for achieving enhanced HER activity for Pt in alkaline electrolytes. The produced hydrogen intermediate Had over the metal hydroxide could be adsorbed by nearby Pt and converted to H2, probably leading to excellent HER activity. For this consideration, Tang et al. constructed a hybrid material consisting of 1D Pt NWs and 2D single-layered Ni(OH)2 (denoted as Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2) through a solvothermal method for superior HER in alkaline electrolytes.49 As shown in Fig. 14f, well-dispersed SL-Ni(OH)2 was firstly obtained by exfoliation in formamide and K2PtCl4 as the Pt source was added to produce the hybrid Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2 under solvothermal treatment. The Pt NWs are well dispersed on the surface of SL-Ni(OH)2 with an average diameter of 1.8 nm (Fig. 14g). Based on the control experiments, both dodecyl sulfate and formamide are indispensable for the growth of Pt NWs on the surface of SL-Ni(OH)2. The high surface energy and higher defect tolerance ability of SL-Ni(OH)2 are also two important factors in facilitating the growth of Pt NWs instead of Pt NPs. The HER current density normalized to the electrochemical surface area of Pt species in 1 M KOH is 2.48 mA cm−2 for Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2 at −0.07 V vs. RHE, nearly one order of magnitude higher than that of commercial Pt/C (0.296 mA cm−2) (Fig. 14h). The Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2 also shows higher stability than commercial Pt/C, with 95.7% of its initial activity maintained after the 4000 s stability test which is higher than that of Pt/C (69.9%) (Fig. 14i). The high HER activity of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2 could be attributed to the synergistic cooperation between Pt NWs and Ni(OH)2 as well as the ultrathin nature of Pt NWs. Ni(OH)2 has effectively activated the OH–H bond, remedying the limited capability of Pt in the dissociation of water. The ultrathin Pt NWs may have exposed more active sites for the adsorption of produced reactive hydrogen intermediates to generate H2.
Besides the metal–metal oxide and metal–metal hydroxide interface, the metal–metal sulfide interface has also been created for Pt-based NWs toward efficient water splitting. Our group reported a new procedure for creating the Pt–Ni/NiS heterostructure by direct sulfuration of highly composition-segregated Pt–Ni NWs (Fig. 15a).48 Similar to the case of Pt3Ni/NiOx interfaces, substantial Pt–Ni/NiS interfaces have been created and the density of interfaces can be controlled by tuning the composition of the starting Pt–Ni NWs (Fig. 15b and c). The formation of Pt–Ni/NiS interfaces and facile control of the interface density comes from the composition segregation nature of Pt–Ni NWs as well as the high reactivity between Ni and S powder. Among the different samples, Pt3Ni2 NWs–S/C shows the highest HER activity with a current density of 37.2 and 20.2 mA cm−2 at −0.07 V (vs. RHE) in alkaline electrolytes with a pH value of 14 and 13, respectively, which is 9.7 and 2.4 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C (3.82 and 8.41 at pH 14 and 13, respectively) (Fig. 15d and e). The synergistic cooperation of Pt and NiS was believed to be responsible for the high HER activity of Pt–Ni NWs/NiS. It was theoretically shown that the energy barrier for breaking the OH–H bond of water molecules on the Pt(111) surface is as high as 0.89 eV, which largely hinders the dissociation of water. Strikingly, the energy barrier for water dissociation on the NiS(100) surface is only 0.32 eV, indicating a high possibility of water dissociation on the NiS surface (Fig. 15f). In the presence of the created Pt–Ni/NiS interfaces, NiS would facilely dissociate water producing Had and OH− through the Volmer step. NiS can also immobilize OH− by the stronger electrostatic affinity to OH−, preventing the blocking of the active site of Pt. The produced Had on the NiS surface would be adsorbed by the nearby Pt site and further converted into H2, thereby leading to high activity of water dissociation for Pt–Ni/NiS interfaces. In addition, a metal–metal interface was constructed in the Ru–Ni sandwiched nanoplates (SNs) (Fig. 15g and h) which also shows boosted HER and OER performance compared to commercial Pt/C and Ir/C.13 All the above examples have vividly demonstrated that constructing heterogeneous nanostructures is a promising approach for achieving enhanced HER activity. It is therefore anticipated that more hybrid materials with effective interfaces would be created for efficient water splitting.
 Fig. 15  (a) A scheme showing the synthesis and sulfurization of Pt–Ni NWs. (b) HAADF-STEM image and EDS mapping of Pt3Ni3 NWs–S. (c) TEM image showing the interface between NiSx and Pt–Ni NWs. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) comparison of current density at −0.07 V vs. RHE for Pt/C and Pt3Nix NWs–S in the KOH electrolyte with a pH of 14. (f) Energy diagram for water dissociation on the NiS(100) surface (red) and Pt(111) surface (black). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (g) TEM image of Ru2Ni2 SNs. (h) HRTEM image of a single Ru2Ni2 SN showing the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
Similar to surface engineering, interface engineering also takes advantage of the synergistic effect of two components of a heterogeneous catalyst. As mentioned, the reaction kinetics of alkaline HER suffers from the dissociation of water molecules even for the benchmark HER catalyst Pt. Thus, the introduction of a phase that can highly boost the dissociation of water molecules can give rise to dramatically improved HER activity. As shown by the above examples, the NiO and NiS phase generated by post-treatment of Pt–Ni nanowires or the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets introduced during synthesis all have the ability to dissociate water molecules in alkaline electrolytes. The generated H intermediates are then adsorbed and reduced to H2 by the nearby Pt nanowires. Regarding the future development of interface engineering for water splitting, efforts could be devoted to the creation of more reactive interfaces besides the ones discussed above, for example, metal–metal phosphide interface, metal–metal selenide interface, metal–metal nitride interface and beyond. As suggested in the last section, interface engineering may also be a potential choice for enhancing the kinetics of acidic OER by designing hybrid catalysts with rich nanoscale interfaces. Furthermore, it is also of great significance to design and synthesize nanoscale interfaces with highly enhanced activity for both HER and OER simultaneously achieving full water splitting.
When it comes to this point, another important factor, support effect, has also been drawing growing attention in the last several years for electrochemical water splitting.170 Different from the interface effect where the two components are both active toward water splitting, the supporting materials are electrochemically inactive but the strong interaction between the support and electrocatalyst can bring significant electronic modification of the catalyst and thereby affect the water splitting properties. For example, the support effect of Au on Ce-doped NiOx was investigated in 2016 by Ng et al. where highly enhanced OER activity was demonstrated.171 An overpotential of only 271 mV is required to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH and the TOF of NiCeOx–Au at 280 mV is one-order of magnitude higher than that of glassy carbon (GC) supported NiCeOx. The superior OER performance of NiCeOx–Au was attributed to the reduced energy barrier from ΔGOH* to ΔGO* because of the Au support effect. The support effect of several supporting materials on the thiomolybdate [Mo3S13]2− cluster for HER was thoroughly studied where [Mo3S13]2−–Au shows a higher TOF value than that of the Ag, GC, or Cu supported [Mo3S13]2− cluster.172 Antimony-doped tin oxide (ATO) was widely used as a supporting substrate to improve the electrochemical properties. For instance, ATO nanoparticles of 3–5 nm were used to support IrOx nanoparticles of 2.5 nm and the stability of IrOx/ATO was much higher than that of IrOx/carbon though the OER activity was not changed.173 From the examples above, we can clearly see that the support materials have a dramatic influence on the water splitting properties of electrocatalysts. However, to the best of our knowledge, the support effect for 1D/2D metallic nanostructures is rarely investigated. It is therefore suggested that more efforts are devoted to this important influencing factor for further enhanced water splitting performance.
4.5 Strain engineering
Strain engineering has now emerged as a novel route to the enhancement of electrochemical properties of materials by tailoring the surface electronic structure and chemical reactivity. As discussed in the previous sections, the Gibbs free energy change for H* adsorption on the catalyst surface (ΔGH*) and binding energy difference between O* and OH*  can serve as the activity descriptor for HER (in acidic electrolytes) and OER, respectively. The volcano-type relationship has suggested that an optimal binding strength is required in order to achieve optimized electrochemical performance. The binding strength between the adsorbates and the catalyst surface is directly related to the surface electronic structure of the catalyst, which can be tailored by applying an elastic strain on the surface. As illustrated in Fig. 16,174,175 the applied strain could alter the d-band center position relative to the Fermi level (εF) of a catalyst, the shift of which can greatly influence the interaction between the adsorbates and the catalyst surface as discussed in the previous section. When a tensile or compressive strain is applied on the early transition metals (with the d band less than half filled), the d bandwidth will be decreased or increased (to preserve the charge conservation), respectively, because of the lowered or increased coordination number. The d-band center of early transition metals would then downshift or upshift in order to maintain the degree of d-band occupancy. The downshift or upshift of the d-band center would cause increased or decreased occupation of antibonding d states for early transition metals, thereby leading to weakened or strengthened interaction with the adsorbates, respectively (Fig. 16a and b). When a tensile or compressive strain is applied on late transition metals, the scenario is opposite.
 Fig. 16  Energy diagrams showing the influence of (a) tensile and (b) compressive strain on the d band of early transition metals. Panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society. 
Strain engineering has been widely used to tune and enhance the electrochemical water splitting properties including both HER and OER.43,44,74,176 Diversified methods have been utilized to create strain for property tuning, including morphology modulation, size control, dealloying, doping, epitaxial growth, etc.74,177–179 Conventional strain tuning sometimes relies on creating catalyst–substrate interfaces which suffer from mechanical instability and strain relaxation. Dissolution may also occur during long-term usage and the active sites may be blocked by the formed (hydroxyl)oxide species from base metals of the substrate in alkaline electrolytes. Furthermore, the presence of heterointerface may complicate the property optimization by strain tuning. Regarding nanoparticle-type catalysts with high surface area, the strain effect may be obscured by the under-coordinated defects and nanoparticle shape. Therefore, it is imperative to develop an effective strategy that can manipulate the intrinsic strain effect of a catalyst. In this regard, Wang et al. studied the effect of intrinsic strain created by surface stress on the catalytic properties of freestanding metal nanosheets.41 The relationship between the resulted strain by surface stress and the nanosheet thickness was first investigated by DFT calculations. The thinning of metal nanosheets usually causes attractive interactions between surface atoms which are manifested as a tensile surface stress (Fig. 17a). The intrinsic tensile surface stress would drive surface contraction and surface energy reduction. The surface pressure has led to compressive in-plane strain. As demonstrated (Fig. 17b), the compressive strain is inversely proportional to the nanosheet thickness except for the thinnest nanosheets (∼1 to 2 monolayers). Tunable strain up to 10% can be achieved with the thickness varying from 1 to 12 monolayers (MLs). In addition, the magnitude of strain highly depends on the elemental identity and surface orientation. Pd was selected to validate the predicted intrinsic strain tuning and Pd nanosheets with different thicknesses (3, 5 and 8 ML) were synthesized using CO as the reductant and stabilizing ligand (Fig. 17c). The measured strain by the template-matching method matches well with the prediction that a decreased thickness leads to increased strain. The trend of measured strain values also matches with that of the calculated values by DFT (Fig. 17d). The generated strain has significantly enhanced the HER activity in both acidic and basic electrolytes compared to commercial Pd/C. With an optimal strain for Pd nanosheets of 5 ML, the sample has demonstrated the highest HER activity as shown in Fig. 17e. This work has demonstrated that strain tuning is a powerful strategy to engineer nanocatalysts for enhanced electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of generating intrinsic strain in 2D metallic nanosheets. h represents the height of an atomic layer. (b) Calculated intrinsic in-plane strain for fcc(111) and hcp(0001) with different thicknesses. (c) TEM image of as-prepared Pd NSs with an average thickness of 5 ML. (d) Comparison of the calculated and measured strain of Pd NSs with different thicknesses. (e) HER overpotentials for Pd/C and Pd NSs with an average thickness of 3 ML, 5 ML, and 8 ML, respectively, in 0.1 M KOH or 0.1 M HClO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The core of strain engineering for boosted water splitting of metallic nanostructures is also related to electronic structure modification. By applying an elastic strain (either compressive or tensile) on the catalyst, the electronic structures and chemical reactivity of surface atoms can be altered to certain extent, which may have a large influence on the electrochemical properties. With an applied elastic strain, the number of neighboring metal atoms would be changed, i.e., change of coordination number, which causes a shift in the d-band center position. The shift of the d-band center position would lead to different interactions between adsorbates and metal d states, which thus has a significant effect on the electrochemical properties of the catalysts. The application of strain engineering in 1D/2D metallic nanostructures for HER is relatively rarely reported compared to other material systems for HER, for example, metal oxides and sulfides.43,74,180,181 Therefore, it calls for more attention to strain engineered 1D/2D metallic nanostructures used for HER. Of important note, the application of strain engineering in metallic nanostructures for enhanced OER has not been reported yet and this gap might need to be filled by future work. One of the key issues for studying strain engineered 1D/2D metallic nanostructures toward enhanced HER or OER is how to create strain in the catalysts. In this regard, the strain could be generated by doping, dealloying, epitaxial growth, etching, applying an external force, etc.74
5. Summary and outlook
This review article has outlined the research progress in metallic nanostructures with low dimensionality, including 1D and 2D metallics, for electrochemical water splitting from the aspects of material synthesis and strategies for property enhancement. Diversified 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures have been synthesized with the developed synthetic methods. More importantly, significantly enhanced water splitting properties have been achieved for these low-dimensional metallic electrocatalysts profiting from the advanced property enhancement strategies. Many reported metallic electrocatalysts have shown much better HER and/or OER performance than the benchmark catalysts such as Pt, IrO2 and RuO2. Some newly developed in situ techniques, for example, in situ XAS, have assisted the elucidation of property–structure correlation. DFT analysis has served as an effective and important tool for understanding the underlying mechanism of property improvement at the atomic level and even guided the design of advanced electrocatalysts for electrochemical water splitting. In spite of the great achievements, however, challenges still exist for the development of electrochemical water splitting. In this final section, the associated challenges will be summarized and perspectives regarding the future development of metallic electrocatalysts for water splitting will be proposed (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Perspectives for the future development of electrochemical water splitting catalyzed by 1D/2D metallic nanostructures. 
(1) Material synthesis
Currently, it is still a great challenge to achieve controllable synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures. The synthesis of low-dimensional metallics, for example, by organic ligand-assisted synthesis, is a complicated process involving the use of multiple components, such as precursors, reducing agents, surfactant, and solvent (even mixed solvents). All of these factors including the synthesis conditions (e.g., temperature and time) can have a dramatic influence on the nucleation and growth of metallic nanocrystals. For example, the reducing ability of different metals or different metal precursors is quite different, making it difficult to achieve controllable fabrication of multimetallic nanostructures which usually possess better properties than single metals. The interaction between each of these factors also varies with different synthesis systems. The high surface energy and highly anisotropic nature of 1D and 2D are also challenges hindering the controllable synthesis. Unfortunately, there is still no specific guideline for the controllable growth of 1D and 2D metallics and most of the current material synthesis is based on a trial-and-error procedure. It is therefore highly imperative to set up a database, with the introduction of each component such as reducing ability of precursors and the interaction between each component, which would guide the synthesis to some extent.
Another issue with the synthesis of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures lies in the high cost. Many of the reported 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures, such as Pt-based nanowires and nanoplates, are synthesized using expensive organic metal precursors (e.g., acetylacetone-based), organic surfactants (e.g., cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), cetyltrimethylammoniumchloride (CTAC)), and organic solvents (e.g., OAm), which drastically increases the synthesis cost. A promising strategy is to develop new synthesis procedures for 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures using cheap inorganic precursors, surfactants or solvents. Finally, the utilization of capping agents such as PVP, OAm, CTAB and CTAC has largely lowered the electrochemical activity of synthesized metallic nanostructures because the capping agents would cover part of the active sites. Although the capping agents (e.g., OAm) can be partly removed by post-treatment, the existence of capping agents has hindered the exploration of the maximum or intrinsic activity of the catalysts. Even worse, some of the capping agents, for example, PVP, cannot be removed at all by low-temperature annealing while high-temperature treatment would destroy the low-dimensional metallic nanostructures. To tackle the problem related to capping agents, more efforts are suggested to develop new synthetic procedures to obtain surface-clean metallic nanostructures. One promising strategy is to directly grow the low-dimensional metallic nanostructures on supports like carbon powder, graphene or carbon nanotubes by optimizing the synthesis conditions.
(2) Mechanism investigation
Although plausible catalytic mechanisms for water splitting including HER and OER have been proposed, the detailed mechanisms especially at the atomic level are still ambiguous which require more in-depth investigation. For example, the HER mechanism in alkaline electrolytes is still ambiguous presently. Totally different from HER in acidic media only involving the hydrogen binding energetics, the HER process in alkaline media is much more complicated, involving the adsorption/dissociation of water molecules, hydrogen adsorption/desorption, poisoning of the catalyst surface by hydroxyl ions, etc. The multiple reaction steps and intermediates have led to intricate reaction pathways and sluggish reaction kinetics, which makes it difficult to clarify the detailed catalytic mechanism. In addition, the hydrogen binding energy difference in acidic and alkaline electrolytes is still unclear though the hydrogen binding energy can work as a suitable activity descriptor for HER in both acidic and alkaline media.52 It is really challenging to understand the detailed catalytic process when it comes to a specific catalytic system, especially for OER. As a four electron–proton coupled reaction, OER involves the formation of several intermediates of OH*, O* and OOH*, which makes it a great challenge to achieve a consolidated reaction mechanism as indicated by the fact that different mechanisms for OER have been proposed by different groups.5
Understanding the catalytic mechanisms is not only of scientific significance, but also provides valuable guidance to the rational design of high-activity electrocatalysts. In this regard, joint efforts from both experimentalists and theorists are called for the elucidation of the reaction mechanism for either HER or OER. Besides the conventional characterization techniques, the state-of-the-art in situ (operando) spectroscopic techniques such as in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) including XANES and EXAFS,182–185in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR),186,187in situ Raman spectroscopy,188,189in situ Mössbauer spectroscopy,190 and surface interrogation scanning electrochemical microscopy (SI-SECM)191,192 have provided unprecedented opportunities for investigating the catalytic mechanisms. These in situ techniques could allow the monitoring of the dynamic change in the surface electronic structure of the catalysts, the dynamic evolution of intermediates on the catalyst surface, the binding strength of adsorbates, etc. The in situ monitoring can provide important information (e.g., chemical state and coordination environment) for probing the correlation of electrochemical performance with the surface electronic structure and the binding strength of adsorbates, laying a foundation for getting mechanistic insight into the reaction process. For example, Frei et al. observed two intermediates on the surface of Co3O4 under real water oxidation conditions using time-resolved FTIR, which reveals two possible reaction pathways (fast and slow) and helps the interrogation of OER mechanisms on Co3O4.187 Using in situ Raman spectroscopy, Bell et al. have clarified the main reason for the drastic change in the electrochemical activity of Ni film, that is, the phase transformation from γ-NiOOH to β-NiOOH during the electrochemical test.193 In addition, isotope labelling is often used together with spectroscopic techniques to assist the investigation of the catalytic mechanism.194–197 For example, by oxygen isotope labelling Julien and coworkers identified the rate-determining step for electrochemical OER on the Fe2O3 surface, that is, O–O bond formation through the nucleophilic water attack on a ferryl unit.196 Through the combination of 18O-labeling and in situ Raman spectroscopy experiments, Hu et al. revealed that lattice oxygen is involved in the OER process of Ni and NiCo layered double hydroxides (LDHs) and NiOO− is a precursor to oxygen. But for NiFe and NiCoFe LDHs, the case is quite different because of the addition of Fe.195 Furthermore, the enormous progress in DFT and powerful quantum computing has allowed researchers to investigate the catalytic process at an atomic level, significantly boosting the development of electrochemical water splitting by providing more in-depth understanding of the catalytic process. Therefore, it is anticipated that more collaborated work could be carried out to clarify the detailed catalytic mechanisms of electrocatalysts for water splitting, which would help with the design of more efficient electrocatalysts.
(3) Performance improvement
Arising from the low dimensional nanostructures and advanced property enhancement strategies, much better performance has been achieved for metallic water splitting electrocatalysts compared to commercial catalysts. For example, the 1D Pt–Ni NWs/NiSx with abundant interfaces has demonstrated much higher HER current density than the commercial Pt/C in alkaline conditions. The stability for HER is also highly improved compared to that of commercial Pt/C. However, the current density for most of the reported catalysts is at the level of several tens of mA per square centimeter, which is far below the requirement for industrial water electrolyzer catalysts,198 for example, the industrial Pt and Ir (>1000 mA cm−2).199,200 The stability performance (several tens of hours) is also far below the requirement of industrial electrolyzers. Therefore, significant efforts are still needed for achieving high-efficiency water splitting electrocatalysts with high activity and long-term durability. One strategy toward the above mentioned issue is to further enhance the water splitting performance of catalysts by developing new design strategies. One of the main reasons for the instability is possibly attributed to the leaching of metals during the electrochemical process, which induces structural changes in the catalysts and thereby affects the activity and especially the cyclic stability. However, the leaching issue of metals is rarely investigated in most reported literature. It is therefore suggested that more efforts are devoted to get deep insights into the leaching issue which will profit the catalyst design. On the other hand, developing new electrocatalysts could be a viable approach toward highly efficient water splitting. One such example is the synthesis of the metallic 2H phase of niobium disulfide with additional niobium for HER. The newly developed 2H Nb1+xS2 (x ∼ 0.35), with a Nb-terminated surface, can deliver an extraordinarily high current density of >5000 mA cm−2 at ∼420 mV (vs. RHE) because of the thermoneutral free energy for hydrogen adsorption.201
Another important aspect for the development of metallic water splitting catalysts that has to be taken into account is the cost. As demonstrated above, most of the 1D and 2D metallic electrocatalysts with excellent catalytic properties are based on precious metals which is definitely detrimental to the future industrial application. Although precious metal-based catalysts hold advantages over the non-precious ones for water splitting in acidic electrolytes, alkaline water splitting is of more interest and it is therefore highly desirable to develop non-precious metal based electrocatalysts for alkaline water splitting. By effective electronic structure modification and morphology control, it is highly possible to develop new cost-effective metallic electrocatalysts as indicated by the examples of Ni–Mo alloy nanosheets with better alkaline HER performance than Pt/C,9 and Mo–Ni–Fe nanobelts for alkaline OER with superior performance compared to commercial IrO2.38 The activity descriptors mentioned in the previous sections, which allow the investigation of the relationship between composition, electronic structure and electrochemical activity, would help with the prediction and design of new catalysts with attractive electrochemical performance. More importantly, high-throughput computational and combinatorial screening is a more appealing approach for the rational design of new electrocatalysts with high efficiency and at low cost.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Ministry of Science and Technology (2016YFA0204100, 2017YFA0208200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21571135), Young Thousand Talented Program, the start-up supports from Soochow University, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), Jiangsu Province Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (BK20170003) and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (17KJB150032).
References
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
L. Li, Q. Gu, Z. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Tan, Q. Li and X. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12263–12269 RSC .
L. Li, J. Huang, M. Li, Q. Li, L. Ouyang, M. Zhu and X. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 16208–16214 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, J. Sun, Y. Li, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7994–8008 RSC .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Huang, B. Li, Y. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Hu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, X. Chen, D. Xu, Y. Hu, H. Zheng, S. L. Suib and B. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, L. Dai, Q. Qin, F. Pei, C. Hu and N. Zheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1602970 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef PubMed .
B. E, L. Bu, Q. Shao, Y. Li and X. Huang, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 36–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Shao, S. Long and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 448–455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Q. Shao, Y. Qian and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, Q. Shao, Y. Feng and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Ji, Q. Shao, N. Zhang, Y. Li and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803722 CrossRef .
F. Song, L. Bai, A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C. Hu, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7748–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z. Tian, L. Zhang, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, B. J. Deibert, R. Ge and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 162 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. J. Xu, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 3–7 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 1–19 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, Q. Zhang and C. Yuan, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381, 3584–3588 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Zhuo, K. Du, B. Chen, Z. Zhu, Y. Shao and M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 26, 3761–3766 CAS .
M. S. Faber, R. Dziedzic, M. A. Lukowski, N. S. Kaiser, Q. Ding and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10053–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, D. Kong, J. Sun, T. M. Hymel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P.-C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, K. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Yao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12859–12863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-C. Cheong, C. Liu, M. Jiang, H. Duan, D. Wang, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2244–2250 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, B. Huang, N. Zhang, M. Sun, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13983–13988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, J. Ding, S. Guo, X. Zhang, D. Su, X. Zhu, J. Yao, J. Guo, G. Lu and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7204–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Y. Chen, C.-Y. Chiu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6284–6290 RSC .
N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhu, J. Guo and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4447–4452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, N. Yan, R. Yu, C.-R. Chang, G. Zhou, H.-S. Hu, H. Rong, Z. Niu, J. Mao, H. Asakura, T. Tanaka, P. J. Dyson, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3093 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bai, G.-R. Xu, S.-H. Xing, J.-H. Zeng, J.-X. Jiang and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33635–33641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Y. Zhao, Q. Qin, X. Zhao, C. Xu and N. Zheng, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 776–780 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, G. Feng, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Li and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 693–697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng, Y. Kuang, P. Li, N. Han, M. Sun, G. Zhang and X. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600179 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Luo, Q. Shao, Y. Pi and X. Huang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573–3583 RSC .
W.-F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Zeng, W. Gao, T. Maxson, D. Raciti, M. Giroux, X. Pan, C. Wang and J. Greeley, Science, 2019, 363, 870–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z.-Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C.-R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ling, D.-Y. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Jiao, Z. Hu, Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, X.-W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1509 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yan, T. A. Maark, A. Khorshidi, V. A. Sethuraman, A. A. Peterson and P. R. Guduru, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6175–6181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pi, N. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4424–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Han, B. Huang, Q. Shao, H. L. Xin and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, Q. Ma, S.-F. Hung, Z.-N. Chen, D. Ou, B. Ren, H. M. Chen, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Chem, 2017, 3, 122–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Guo, G. Lu, J. Yao and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
N. Mahmood, Y. Yao, J.-W. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700464 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Q. Shao, B. Huang, M. Sun and X. Huang, iScience, 2019, 11, 492–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. M. Bockris and Z. S. Minevski, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1471–1479 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Appleby, Nat. Phys. Sci., 1972, 238, 75–76 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eyring, S. Glasstone and K. J. Laidler, J. Chem. Phys., 1939, 7, 1053–1065 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
E. Skúlason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, S. Gudmundsdóttir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 CrossRef .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, Y. C. Kimmel and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3025–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, K.-C. Chang, J. Kubal, N. M. Markovic and J. Greeley, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17070 CrossRef CAS .
D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes, B. Genorio, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1980, 111, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .
M. Retuerto, L. Pascual, F. Calle-Vallejo, P. Ferrer, D. Gianolio, A. G. Pereira, Á. García, J. Torrero, M. T. Fernández-Díaz, P. Bencok, M. A. Peña, J. L. G. Fierro and S. Rojas, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2041 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, H. Xu and D. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20228–20237 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, A. D. Doyle, J. K. Nørskov and A. Vojvodic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3813–3818 RSC .
G. Murdachaew and K. Laasonen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25882–25892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Kuo, H. Paik, J. Kloppenburg, B. Faeth, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom, G. Hautier and J. Suntivich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17597–17605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Krishnamurthy, V. Sumaria and V. Viswanathan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 588–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, W. Xu, L. Wu, Y.-C. Hsieh, P. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Sasaki, J. N. Renner, K. E. Ayers, R. R. Adzic and J. X. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 819, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, M. Zhou, Y. Zhou and X. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701931 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. M. Koper, Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Seo, H. W. Park, D. U. Lee, M. G. Park and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4337–4344 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17378–17383 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skúlason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241–3250 RSC .
J. Rossmeisl, E. Skulason, M. Björketun, V. Tripkovic and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 466, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
E. Santos, P. Quaino and W. Schmickler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11224–11233 RSC .
N. Yuan, Q. Jiang, J. Li and J. Tang, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 4294–4309 CrossRef .
K. S. Exner, I. Sohrabnejad-Eskan and H. Over, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1864–1879 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dubouis and A. Grimaud, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9165–9181 RSC .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Ang, K. N. Dinh, X. Sun, Y. Huang, J. Yang, Z. Dong, X. Dong, W. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Research, 2019, 2019, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Gorzkowski and A. Lewera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18389–18395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang and B.-J. Ni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14971–15005 RSC .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23782–23802 RSC .
P. Quaino, E. Santos, H. Wolfschmidt, M. A. Montero and U. Stimming, Catal. Today, 2011, 177, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 810–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, Science, 2011, 334, 1355–1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, J. K. Nørskov and M. Mavrikakis, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2002, 53, 319–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hammer, Top. Catal., 2006, 37, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nilsson, L. G. M. Pettersson, B. Hammer, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Catal. Lett., 2005, 100, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Koper and R. A. van Santen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 472, 126–136 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897–2901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Advance in Catalysis, Academic Press,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
M. Mavrikakis, B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2819–2822 CrossRef .
M. Wakisaka, S. Mitsui, Y. Hirose, K. Kawashima, H. Uchida and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23489–23496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Foster and F. Weinhold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7211–7218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, J. M. Rondinelli, W. Yang, J. B. Goodenough, B. Dabrowski, J. W. Freeland and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1856–1863 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1892–1897 RSC .
L. Bu, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Su, G. Lu, X. Zhu, J. Yao, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, L. Bu, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5037–5043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jang, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1273–1275 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J.-Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Q. Shao, Y. Pi, J. Guo and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5009–5015 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kong, K. Xu, C. Zhang, J. Dai, S. Norooz Oliaee, L. Li, X. Zeng, C. Wu and Z. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1487–1492 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, C. Xu, H. Su, J. Liang, S. Lin, L. Gu, X. Wang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500100 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Hong, Y. Kim, D. H. Wi, S. Lee, S.-U. Lee, Y. W. Lee, S.-I. Choi and S. W. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2753–2758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-X. Yin, W.-C. Liu, J. Ke, W. Zhu, J. Gu, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20479–20489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Saleem, B. Xu, B. Ni, H. Liu, F. Nosheen, H. Li and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2013–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Q. Xie, L. Zheng, G. Feng, Y. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Bi, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2988–2997 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, M. Jiang, Z. Cai, Y. Pang, Z. Chang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9517–9522 RSC .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-C. Chen, Y.-M. Chang, P.-W. Wu and Y.-F. Chiu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6596–6602 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shen, Q. Cheng, C. Yan and S. Park, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 103 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Tang, Z. Guo, X. Wang, S. Mo, X. Huang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, P. Zhong, K. Liu, L. Han, H. Zheng, Y. Yin and C. Gao, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 398–404 RSC .
F. Zhang, N. Wu, J. Zhu, J. Zhao, G.-J. Weng, J.-J. Li and J.-W. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 271, 174–182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, Y. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Han, Q. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5672–5676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, Q. Shao, D. Zhao, L. Bu, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700830 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, D. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Guo, G. Lu and X. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601705 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Zhu, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 29, 1603774 Search PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Bu, Q. Shao, X. Zhu and X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8384–8387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, X. Mu, J. Fan, H. Ma, X. Zhao, G. Chen, Z. Zhou and N. Zheng, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Tang, J. Yang, Y. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15946–15949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Small, 2014, 10, 3139–3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Z. Chang, W. Zhu and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9651–9653 RSC .
L. Malferrari, A. Jagminien, G. P. Veronese, F. Odorici, M. Cuffiani and A. Jagminas, J. Nanotechnol., 2009, 2009, 8 Search PubMed .
U. Kayal, B. Mohanty, P. Bhanja, S. Chatterjee, D. Chandra, M. Hara, B. Kumar Jena and A. Bhaumik, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 2220–2227 RSC .
P. Bhanja, B. Mohanty, A. K. Patra, S. Ghosh, B. K. Jena and A. Bhaumik, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 583–592 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, H. Lin, N. Xie and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Qi, M. Liu, S. Zhang, Q. Fan, H. Liu, K. Liu, H. Zheng, Y. Yin and C. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11678–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, M. Luo, J. Han, W. Peng, Y. Zhao, D. Chen, M. Peng, J. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, H. Wang, S. Li, B. Liu, J. Yang, J. Gao, Z. Peng, Z. Zhang and Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 327, 134958 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1232–1239 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Su, P. Jiang, G. Xia and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3596–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, L. Bu, S. Guo, Z. Zhao, E. Zhu, Y. Huang and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2762–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, P. Wang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Shen, G. Lu, D. Su and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9030–9035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tong, B. Huang, P. Wang, L. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2649–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, H. Xie, L. Chang, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, X. Tong, T. Wang, Y. Luo, P. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Sun, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100011 CrossRef .
W. Luc, C. Collins, S. Wang, H. Xin, K. He, Y. Kang and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1885–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, P. Wang, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700886 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Luo, P. Yu, Y. Cai, Y. Du, D. Wu, S. Gao, C. Tan, Z. Li, M. Ren, T. Osipowicz, S. Chen, Z. Jiang, J. Li, Y. Huang, J. Yang, Y. Chen, C. Y. Ang, Y. Zhao, P. Wang, L. Song, X. Wu, Z. Liu, A. Borgna and H. Zhang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 460–468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Staszak-Jirkovský, C. D. Malliakas, P. P. Lopes, N. Danilovic, S. S. Kota, K.-C. Chang, B. Genorio, D. Strmcnik, V. R. Stamenkovic, M. G. Kanatzidis and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 197–203 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12495–12498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Q. Shao, X. Xiao and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808161 CrossRef .
W. Sheng, H. A. Gasteiger and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1529–B1536 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808167 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. D. Ng, M. García-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16053 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, D. W. Palm, L. A. King, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7126–7130 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Oh, H. N. Nong, T. Reier, A. Bergmann, M. Gliech, J. Ferreira de Araújo, E. Willinger, R. Schlögl, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12552–12563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schnur and A. Groß, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 33402 CrossRef .
M. Luo and S. Guo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17059 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Petrie, H. Jeen, S. C. Barron, T. L. Meyer and H. N. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7252–7255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Sneed, A. P. Young and C.-K. Tsung, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12248–12265 RSC .
A. Chen, J.-M. Hu, P. Lu, T. Yang, W. Zhang, L. Li, T. Ahmed, E. Enriquez, M. Weigand, Q. Su, H. Wang, J.-X. Zhu, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, L.-Q. Chen, D. Yarotski and Q. Jia, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600245 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chen, Z. Harrell, P. Lu, E. Enriquez, L. Li, B. Zhang, P. Dowden, C. Chen, H. Wang, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and Q. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900442 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, G. Gao, M. Du, J. Zhou, K. Wang, W. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Li, P. Ma, W. Dong, F. Duan, M. Chen, G. Wu, J. Wu, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707301 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Wang, Y.-Y. Hsu, R. Chen, T.-S. Chan, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500091 CrossRef .
D. F. Abbott, D. Lebedev, K. Waltar, M. Povia, M. Nachtegaal, E. Fabbri, C. Copéret and T. J. Schmidt, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6591–6604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gorlin, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, J. D. Benck, S. Gul, S. M. Webb, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8525–8534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Pfeifer, T. E. Jones, J. J. Velasco Vélez, R. Arrigo, S. Piccinin, M. Hävecker, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlögl, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2143–2149 RSC .
M. Zhang, M. de Respinis and H. Frei, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Trześniewski, O. Diaz-Morales, D. A. Vermaas, A. Longo, W. Bras, M. T. M. Koper and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15112–15121 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Deng, A. D. Handoko, Y. Du, S. Xi and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2473–2481 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 612–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fierro, T. Nagel, H. Baltruschat and C. Comninellis, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1969–1974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, K. Banjac, M. Lingenfelder and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10295–10299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haschke, M. Mader, S. Schlicht, A. M. Roberts, A. M. Angeles-Boza, J. A. C. Barth and J. Bachmann, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4565 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601275 CrossRef .

          X. L. Yan and R. Hino, Nuclear hydrogen production handbook, Boca Raton, CRC Press,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Zhigang, Y. Baolian and H. Ming, J. Power Sources, 1999, 79, 82–85 CrossRef .
S. Altmann, T. Kaz and K. A. Friedrich, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4287–4293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, A. R. Mohmad, Y. Wang, R. Fullon, X. Song, F. Zhao, I. Bozkurt, M. Augustin, E. J. G. Santos, H. S. Shin, W. Zhang, D. Voiry, H. Y. Jeong and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1309–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Leigang Li
	Leigang Li received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Texas A&M University under the supervision of Professor Haiyan Wang in 2017. He then worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Purdue University. Since 2018, he has been working as a postdoctoral research fellow at Soochow University in Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group. His current research interest is focused on the design and synthesis of metallic nanostructures for electrocatalytic applications.

Pengtang Wang
	Pengtang Wang received his BS degree from Soochow University in 2015. Now he is pursuing his PhD degree in Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. His current research interests are focused on the phase and interface control of metal-based catalysts for electrochemical applications.

Qi Shao
	Qi Shao received her PhD degree in Applied Physics from City University of Hong Kong in 2016, working in the field of magnetically controlled electronic and optical properties of diluted magnetic semiconductors. Then she joined Professor Xiaoqing Huang's group at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University as an assistant professor in 2016. Her current research interests are mainly focused on non-noble metal based catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion, such as overall water splitting and CO2 reduction.

Xiaoqing Huang
	Xiaoqing Huang is currently a Professor at College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. He obtained his BS in chemistry education from Southwest Normal University (2005) and PhD in inorganic chemistry from Xiamen University (2011) under the supervision of Profs Nanfeng Zheng and Lansun Zheng. He then worked as a postdoctoral research associate in Profs Yu Huang and Xiangfeng Duan's group from 2011 to 2014 at the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials for energy related applications such as electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis methods and main strategies used for improving the electrochemical water splitting performance of 1D and 2D metallic nanostructures.	 
EP = 1.23 V + ηa + ηc + ηother




Acidic solution	2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2	M + H+ + e− ↔ M–H*	M–H* + H+ + e− ↔ M + H2	2M–H* ↔ 2M + H2
Alkaline solution	2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2 + 2OH−	M + H2O + e− ↔ M–H* + OH−	M–H* + H2O + e− ↔ M + OH− + H2


Acidic solution	2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	M + H2O → M–OH* + H+ + e−
M–OH* + OH− → M–O* + H2O + e−
Then either
2M–O* → 2M + O2 or
M–O* + H2O → MOOH* + H+ + e−
MOOH* + H2O → M + O2 + H+ + e−


Alkaline solution	4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	M + OH− → M–OH*
M–OH* + OH− → M–O* + H2O
Then either
2M–O* → 2M + O2 or
M–O* + OH− → M–OOH* + e−
M–OOH* + OH− → M + O2 + H2O

 	Fig. 1  (a) A volcano-type plot showing the relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* based on the Langmuir adsorption model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 1958, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* for a series of HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Scaling relation between the adsorption energy of OOH* and OH* for a series of oxide catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Activity trends for a series of OER electrocatalysts as a function of standard free energy . Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS + ΔGU + ΔG(pH) + ΔGfield

 	Fig. 2  (a) A scheme showing the formation of a chemical bond between the metal surface and the adsorbate through orbital hybridization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2005, Springer Nature. (b) The projected density of states (DOS) for hydrogen atoms adsorbed on the (111) face of different metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 1995, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Relationship between hydrogen binding strength and d-band center for elemental metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Relationship between oxygen binding strength and d-band center for elemental metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2000, Elsevier Inc.	 
η = a + blogj

 		 

Organic ligand-assisted synthesis	Pt–M NWs (M = Ni, Co, Fe)	Diversified nanostructures; facile operation	Usually expensive organic precursors required	
27

Pt/PtxPb core/shell NWs	
29

Ru–Ni NSs	
55

Hierarchical Pt–Co NWs	
123

Thread-like Pt–Cu NWs	
124

Ultrathin Rh NSs	
125

PtPb hexagonal nanoplates	
126

Rh hexagonal NSs	
127

RuCu nanotubes	
28

Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis	Rh NSs	Simple setup; facile operation; large-scale synthesis	Usually requires surfactants affecting catalytic performance; limited products (non-metallics)	
30

PtCu alloy NSs	
33

PdPt NWs	
7

Rh NS assemblies	
31

Ru NSs	
128

Carbon monoxide confined growth	Pd NSs	Easy to obtain high-quality 2D nanosheets	Limited to 2D nanostructures; release of toxic CO	
32

Rh NSs	
129

PdNi NSs	
25

PdPtAg NSs	
130

PdCu NSs	
8

Ru NSs	
131

Rh NSs	
30

PtCu alloy NSs	
132

Topotactic reduction	Lamellar Ni NSs	Easy to produce a 2D nanostructure array; large-scale synthesis	Limited to 2D nanostructures; mostly on non-precious metallic nanostructures; application limited to alkaline electrolytes	
34

NiCo NS array	
35

NiMo NSs	
9

CoFe NSs	
133

CoFePt NSs	
134

Bi NSs	
135

Templated growth	Ni NWs	Diversified nanostructures benefiting from the template	Complicated synthesis procedures	
136

Rh NWs	
137

4H/fcc Au@PdAg NRBs	
6

Au square sheets	
36

Pd@Au nanoplates	
138

Ag@Pt nanoplates	
139

Au@AuAg yolk–shell NSs	
140

Au@Pd core–shell nanoplates	
141


 	Fig. 3  (a) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron miscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of hierarchical Pt–Co NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM image of Rh NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of Pt–Pb nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. TEM images of (d) Cu nanocubes, (e) Cu NWs, and (f) RuCu NTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Pd NSs using NBu4Br as the structure-directing agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of PdCu alloy NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) TEM image of PdPtAg NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) TEM image of Rh NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A scheme showing the fabrication of Ni NSs from topotactic reduction of Ni(OH)2. SEM images of (b) Ni(OH)2 and (c) Ni NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of topotactic conversion of NiMoO4 to NiMo NSs. SEM images of (e) NiMoO4 and (f) NiMo NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Ni NWs by dc pulse electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2009, Elsevier Inc. (b) SEM image of Rh NWs by electrochemical deposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI). (c) Schematic illustration of the growth of 4H/fcc Au@PdAg, Au@PtAg, and Au@PtPdAg NRBs using 4H/fcc Au@Ag NRBs as the template. (d) High-resolution TEM image of 4H/fcc Au@PdAg NRBs showing the alternating 4H and fcc structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of Au square sheets grown on the GO surface. The inset represents crystal models for an Au sheet. (f) Schematic illustration of the growth of Au sheets on the GO surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Ru3Ni3 NAs	1 M KOH	39	26.9	10 h at 5 mA cm−2	
55

Ru3Ni3 NAs	0.5 M H2SO4	39	53.9	12 h at 5 mA cm−2	
55

2D PtCu NSs	0.05 M H2SO4	55 at 100 mA cm−2	N.A.	5000 cycles	
33

2D PtAgCo NSs	0.5 M H2SO4	400 mV at 705 mA cm−2	27	5000 cycles	
153

2D Ni–Mo alloy NSs	1 M KOH	35	45	1000 cycles	
9

RuCu NSs	1 M KOH	20	15.3	N.A.	
26

RuCu NSs	0.5 M H2SO4	19	27.3	N.A.	
26

a-RuTe2 PNRs	1 M KOH	36	36	N.A.	
46

a-RuTe2 PNRs	0.5 M H2SO4	33	35	N.A.	
46

Ni-BDT-A	1 M KOH	80	70	20 h at 20 mA cm−2	
47

Pt3.6Ni–S NWs	1 M KOH	70 at 66.9 mA cmdisk−2	114.8	N.A.	
154

Pt–Ni NWs/NiOx	1 M KOH	40	N.A.	3 h at −0.07 V (vs. RHE)	
24

Pt3Ni2 NWs–S	1 M KOH	70 at 37.2 mA cm−2	N.A.	5 h at 5 mA cm−2	
48

Ru2Ni2 SNs	1 M KOH	40	23.4	N.A.	
13

Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2	1 M KOH	70 at 2.48 mA cm−2	N.A.	4000 s	
49

Pd NSs 5 ML	0.1 M HClO4	49 at 5 mA cm−2	N.A.	N.A.	
41


Ru3Ni3 NAs	1 M KOH	304	91.7	10 h at 5 mA cm−2	
55

Ru3Ni3 NAs	0.5 M H2SO4	252	45.8	10 h at 5 mA cm−2	
55

Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs	1 M KOH	257	51	40 h at 10 mA cm−2	
38

RuCu NSs	1 M KOH	234	41.2	21.5 h at 5 mA cm−2	
26

RuCu NSs	0.5 M H2SO4	236	40.4	13.5 h at 5 mA cm−2	
26

Ir superstructure	1 M KOH	∼240	32.7	N.A.	
45

Ir superstructure	0.1 M HClO4	270	46.6	8 h at 2.5 mA cm−2	
45

a-RuTe2 PNRs	1 M KOH	285	62	N.A.	
46

a-RuTe2 PNRs	0.5 M H2SO4	245	47	N.A.	
46


 	Fig. 7  (a) and (b) HAADF-STEM image of Ru3Ni3 NAs. (c) HAADF-STEM image and EDS mapping of Ru3Ni3 NAs. (d) HER polarization curves of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs, Ru NAs, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (e) OER polarization curves of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs, Ru NAs, and Ir/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Surface valence-band photoemission spectra of Ru3Ni3 NAs, Ru3Ni2 NAs, Ru3Ni1 NAs and Ru NAs. (g) A scheme showing the electron transition from the t2g orbital to the eg orbital and the intermediate's spin state transition on the Ru–Ni(100) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image with size distribution (inset) and (b) HRTEM image of PtCu alloy NSs. (c) HER polarization curves of Pt black, PtCu NP and PtCu NS measured in 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PtAg and PtAgCo NSs. (e) TEM image of PtAgCo NSs and (f) HER polarization curves of Pt/C, AgCo, PtAg and PtAgCo in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HAADF-STEM and (b) TEM images for the Mo51Ni40Fe9 NBs. (c) LSV curves for commercial IrO2 and Mo-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of the Ni–Mo nanosheet obtained by topotactic reduction. The inset TEM image shows the thickness of the Ni–Mo nanosheet. (e) HER polarization curves and (f) Nyquist plots of the NiMoO4 precursor, Ni foam, Ni–Mo nanosheets, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM images of RuCu NSs. (c) HER polarization curves for RuCu NSs, RuCu NPs, Ir/C and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the 3D Ir superstructure. (e) Schematic illustration of the 3D Ir superstructure used for alkaline and acidic OER. (f) OER polarization curves for surface-clean 3D Ir, 3D Ir, Ir NPs and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image, (b) XRD pattern, and (c) EDS elemental mapping of RuTe2 PNRs. (d) HER and OER polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs, Ir/C and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (e) Overall water-splitting polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs‖a-RuTe2 PNRs and Ir/C‖Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Positron lifetime spectra and (g) electron spin resonance spectra of a-RuTe2 PNRs and c-RuTe2 PNRs. (h) Schematic illustration of the electronic activity enhancement for the amorphous structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) Ni-BDT and (b) Ni-BDT-A. (c) Extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (EXAFS) of Ni foil, Ni-BDT and Ni-BDT-A. (d) HER polarization curves of Ni(OH)2, Ni-BDT, Ni-BDT-A and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (e) A scheme showing the synthesis of Ni-BDT and in situ electrochemical activation producing Ni-BDT-A with adsorbed Sadδ−. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM image (the inset presents the statistics of the diameter of NWs) and (b) EDS mapping of PtNi–S NWs. (c) XPS spectrum of S for ultrathin PtNi–S NWs. (d) HER polarization curves for Pt/C, Pt–S, Pt3.6Ni–S, Pt2.9Co–S and Pt4.9Fe–S in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of producing different Pt3Nix NWs/C electrocatalysts by annealing under different atmospheres. (b) HAADF-STEM image of Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-air. (c) TEM image of the interface region between Pt3Ni and NiO. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) histograms of activity at 0.07 V (vs. RHE) for Pt/C, Pt3Ni3 NWs/C, Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-H2, and Pt3Ni3 NWs/C-air in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (g) TEM image of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (h) HER polarization curves for Pt/C, Pt NWs, Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 and Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. (i) Normalized i–t chronoamperometric curves for Pt/C, Pt NWs, Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 and Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) A scheme showing the synthesis and sulfurization of Pt–Ni NWs. (b) HAADF-STEM image and EDS mapping of Pt3Ni3 NWs–S. (c) TEM image showing the interface between NiSx and Pt–Ni NWs. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) comparison of current density at −0.07 V vs. RHE for Pt/C and Pt3Nix NWs–S in the KOH electrolyte with a pH of 14. (f) Energy diagram for water dissociation on the NiS(100) surface (red) and Pt(111) surface (black). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (g) TEM image of Ru2Ni2 SNs. (h) HRTEM image of a single Ru2Ni2 SN showing the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 16  Energy diagrams showing the influence of (a) tensile and (b) compressive strain on the d band of early transition metals. Panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of generating intrinsic strain in 2D metallic nanosheets. h represents the height of an atomic layer. (b) Calculated intrinsic in-plane strain for fcc(111) and hcp(0001) with different thicknesses. (c) TEM image of as-prepared Pd NSs with an average thickness of 5 ML. (d) Comparison of the calculated and measured strain of Pd NSs with different thicknesses. (e) HER overpotentials for Pd/C and Pd NSs with an average thickness of 3 ML, 5 ML, and 8 ML, respectively, in 0.1 M KOH or 0.1 M HClO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Scheme 2  Perspectives for the future development of electrochemical water splitting catalyzed by 1D/2D metallic nanostructures.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
