Ether-based electrolytes for sodium ion batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00948F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00948F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4484-4536Ether-based electrolytes for sodium ion batteries

        
          
            Ying 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mingquan 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Feng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Bai
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chuan 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: liyu0820@bit.edu.cn; membrane@bit.edu.cn; chuanwu@bit.edu.cn
bYangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing 314019, P. R. China
Received 
      31st December 2021
    First published on 11th May 2022AbstractSodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are considered to be strong candidates for large-scale energy storage with the benefits of cost-effectiveness and sodium abundance. Reliable electrolytes, as ionic conductors that regulate the electrochemical reaction behavior and the nature of the interface and electrode, are indispensable in the development of advanced SIBs with high Coulombic efficiency, stable cycling performance and high rate capability. Conventional carbonate-based electrolytes encounter numerous obstacles for their wide application in SIBs due to the formation of a dissolvable, continuous-thickening solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer and inferior stability with electrodes. Comparatively, ether-based electrolytes (EBEs) are emerging in the secondary battery field with fascinating properties to improve the performance of batteries, especially SIBs. Their stable solvation structure enables highly reversible solvent-co-intercalation reactions and the formation of a thin and stable SEI. However, although EBEs can provide more stable cycling and rapid sodiation kinetics in electrodes, benefitting from their favorable electrolyte/electrode interactions such as chemical compatibility and good wettability, their special chemistry is still being investigated and puzzling. In this review, we provide a thorough and comprehensive overview on the developmental history, fundamental characteristics, superiorities and mechanisms of EBEs, together with their advances in other battery systems. Notably, the relation among electrolyte science, interfacial chemistry and electrochemical performance is highlighted, which is of great significance for the in-depth understanding of battery chemistry. Finally, future perspectives and potential directions are proposed to navigate the design and optimization of electrolytes and electrolyte/electrode interfaces for advanced batteries.
Ying Li
Ying Li received her MS Degree from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 2019 and continued her research as a PhD candidate supervised by Prof. Feng Wu. Her research focuses on the design of high-performance electrolytes and electrode materials for rechargeable batteries.
Feng Wu
Feng Wu is currently a professor at BIT. He is the Director of the Green Energy Research Institute. As the Chief Scientist, he has hosted three “National Program on Key Basic Research Projects (973 Programs)”. He has published over 600 papers and authorized over 90 patents. In 2012, he was awarded the IBA Research Award for outstanding research on battery materials and systems for electric vehicles. In 2017, Prof. Wu was elected as an Academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering.
Yu Li
Yu Li obtained her PhD majoring in Environmental Engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) and is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at BIT. Her research interests focus on high performance rechargeable batteries system. As the Principal Investigator, Dr Li successfully hosted the National Natural Science Foundation, China Postdoctoral Innovative Talent Support Program, etc. She has authored/co-authored over 40 research papers in the battery field.
Ying Bai
Ying Bai is currently a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). Her research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. Dr Bai earned her Bachelor's Degree from the Applied Chemistry Division at Harbin Institute of Technology, China (HIT) in 1997. She completed her PhD at the School of Chemical Engineering & Materials Science at BIT in 2003. In 2013, she was awarded New Century Excellent Talents in University from the Chinese Ministry of Education. She hosted and is hosting projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China as a Principal Investigator.
Chuan Wu
Chuan Wu is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), where his interests are new energy materials and secondary batteries based on multi-electron materials. He received his PhD Degree in Applied Chemistry from BIT in 2002, followed by a 2 year postdoctoral fellowship in Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is experienced in energy conversion and storage. Dr Wu was awarded the Beijing Outstanding Talents Cultivation Project in 2007, Beijing Nova Program Award in 2009, and New Century Excellent Talents in University in 2012.
1. Introduction
Clean and renewable energy has intensively penetrated the energy market to reduce the dependence on fossil energy and meet the requirements of high energy efficiency and environmental protection. However, among the available clean energy sources, primary energy sources such as wind power and solar energy, suffer from an intermittent supply and regional variation when coupled with current power grid systems. Thus, given that large-scale energy storage is essential, secondary batteries have capitalized and narrowed the gap between the fluctuating power supply from renewable sources and the sustainable output requirements from power grids owing to their good reliability, high energy density, high conversion efficiency, and superior supply flexibility.1,2 It is well-known that lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved wide use in the secondary battery market.3–6 However, the limited resources and staggering consumption of lithium have increased its cost significantly, hindering the use of LIBs in large-scale energy storage systems. As a novel secondary battery system, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are considered to have great potential for application in large-scale energy storage with the benefits of cost-effectiveness, large abundance of sodium and similar properties with LIBs (Fig. 1a).7,8 To satisfy the requirements of large-scale energy storage, researchers have focused on constructing SIBs with high Coulombic efficiency, stable cycling performance and high-rate capability. Definitely, suitable electrolytes are the premise and foundation to develop high-performance SIBs, which strongly influence the battery performance by controlling the ionic transportation, working potential range and regulating the electrochemical reaction behavior of the solid liquid interface.
 Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of physical/chemical properties of Li and Na. (b) Multi-angle comparison of different types of electrolytes (organic electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes and solid electrolytes) with crucial properties of conductivity, safety, compatibility, cost and oxidative stability. Organic electrolytes provide technical superiorities under comprehensive consideration. (c) Proportion of research on ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes in sodium batteries (last updated on 20th September 2021). The keywords used for the search in the Web of Science were “ether electrolyte sodium battery”, and “carbonate electrolyte sodium battery”. (d) Number of publications dealing with ether-based electrolyte for sodium batteries from 1990 to September 2021. (e) The roadmap of the important works of ether-based electrolytes for SIBs. 
Currently, many electrolyte systems have been developed such as organic liquid electrolytes,9 ionic liquids,10 aqueous electrolytes11 and solid electrolytes.12 Among them, organic electrolytes exhibit the most balanced performance in terms of high ionic conductivity, wide electrochemical stable voltage range, stable formation of solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and good electrode compatibility (Fig. 1b). Ether-based electrolytes (EBEs) and carbonate-based electrolytes (CBEs) are the two main categories of organic electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 1c, CBEs, such as EC/DEC-based electrolytes, are the most widely-applied electrolytes due to their high salt solubility and fast ion transport property.13,14 However, their further application is hindered by the formation of a dissolvable and continuous-thickening carbonate-derived SEI layer, electrochemical inertia with graphite and nucleophilic addition reaction with metal sulfides/selenides, which result in the undesirable capacity decay, low Coulombic efficiency and poor rate capability in CBEs. In contrast, EBEs seem to be better candidates for SIBs, and thus have attracted increasing interest in recent years (Fig. 1d), owing to their high-quality SEI and superior compatibility with electrodes. To visually show the development process of ether-based electrolytes in SIBs, Fig. 1e presents a roadmap of the important works on ether-based electrolytes for SIBs. Beginning with the discovery of the reversible co-intercalation of graphite in ether-based electrolytes, the superiority of ether-based electrolytes has been gradually discovered in various electrodes, including selenides,15 sulfides,16 bismuth,17 expanded graphite,18 petroleum coke and graphitized carbon nanofibers.19 The application of ether-based electrolytes has resulted in an enhancement of the electrochemical performances of SIBs, including initial Coulombic efficiency (ICE), reversible capacity, cycle stability and rate capability (Fig. 2a). As shown in Fig. 2b, the same electrode material can exhibit significant improvements in battery performance by simply replacing CBEs with EBEs. In the case of cycling stability, an ultralong cycle life of up to 10000 cycles with a high capacity-retention rate of 90% could be achieved in EBEs, such as pyrite FeS2 electrode16 and Bi@graphite20 anode. In contrast, most of the presented electrodes exhibited an inferior cycle life of less than 1000 cycles in CBEs.20,21 Even alloying anodes, such as micro-sized Sn with severe volume change and structural instability in cycling, could deliver an ultrahigh capacity retention rate of 99.8% in 5000 cycles without any electrode optimization in EBEs.22 Notably, graphite, which used to be regarded as “inactive” in SIBs, could deliver a capacity of ∼130 mA h g−1 and maintain 95% capacity after 6000 cycles in EBEs due to the highly reversible Na+-solvent-co-intercalation mechanism.23 Besides, as shown in Fig. 2c, various types of electrodes have shown excellent ICE values of over 80% in EBEs. For instance, rGO electrodes with a large surface area could deliver a high ICE of 75.6% in EBEs, whereas only of 39% in CBEs.24 In the case of rate capability (Fig. 2d), carbon materials,25,26 metal oxides27,28 and sulfides29,30 have also demonstrated much better performances in EBEs. Briefly, it is evident that EBEs have become a reliable electrolyte system for high-performance SIBs. However, the reason why the ether-based electrolytes exhibit outstanding performances in SIBs is still under debate. Although some reviews have highlighted the uniqueness of EBEs,31,32 there is still no special review article discussing the fundamentals and mechanisms of the superior performances of EBEs. Moreover, the structure–property relationships of ether-based electrolytes and their effects on the performance of sodium-ion batteries have not been summarized to date.
 Fig. 2  Performances of sodium ion batteries involving EBEs and CBEs. (a) Schematic of electrochemical performances of batteries determined by their capacity, ICE, cycle stability and rate capability. (b) Cycle numbers and capacity retention rates of the same electrode materials in EBEs and CBEs. (c) ICE and capacity values of the same electrode in the above-mentioned two electrolytes. (d) Rate capabilities of the same electrode in the above-mentioned two electrolytes. The performance is evaluated based on single electrodes in half-cells. The filled dots represent the electrode performance in ether-based electrolytes, while the hollow dots represent the electrode performance in carbonate-based electrolytes. Data for performance analysis is based on carbon electrodes, alloying electrodes, metal sulfides, metal oxides, and metal selenides, which are labeled in red, orange, blue, green and purple, respectively. They were last updated on 20th September 2021. 
Herein, we aim to review the mechanisms of EBEs and determine the relationship among this type of electrolyte and the interface and electrode. To lay a foundation for the better understanding of EBEs, the influence of electrolytes on the performance of batteries should be systematically discussed. Thus, we classify the four paths through which electrolytes influence the battery performance. As illustrated in Fig. 3, electrolytes can directly affect the battery performance through their inherent physicochemical properties and participation in electrochemical reactions (path 1 and 2). Besides, electrolytes can indirectly affect the battery performance through their influence on the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and electrode (path 3 and 4). Specifically, Fig. 4 illustrates the four influencing paths in detail. Path 1: Basic physicochemical property. The high ionic conductivity of an electrolyte indicates its fast ion transportation rate in the bulk electrolyte, which is crucial to guarantee fast reaction kinetics. In addition, the electrochemical stability of electrolytes limits the working potential range and the energy density of batteries. The decomposition of electrolytes leads to the loss of active Na+ and a reduction in the reversible capacity. Path 2: participating in the battery reaction. For electrolyte-participating reactions, a classic example is the solvent co-intercalation reaction in graphite, in which the nature of the electrolyte, such as solvation behavior, steric configuration, and chain length can directly impact the reversibility, working potential and sodium storage kinetics. Path 3: Controlling the nature of the SEI. As the chemical parent of the SEI, electrolytes can determine the nature of the SEI through regulation of the solvation effect. The type and relative quantity of solvents and anions in the solvation shells will lead to a difference in the thickness, composition (organic or inorganic species) and structure (layered or mosaic structure) of the formed SEI layers. The properties of SEI strongly impact the ICE, cycle stability and charge transfer kinetics of battery. Path 4: influencing the compatibility with electrode. Favorable electrolyte/electrode chemical compatibility is crucial to avoid undesirable side reactions and rapid capacity decay. Additionally, the good wettability of electrolyte is beneficial to reduce polarization of the battery reaction. Also, by regulating the sodium storage behavior and absorption of the electrolyte by the electrode, the electrolyte can impact the ion diffusion kinetics and the structural evolution of the electrode.
 Fig. 3  Relations among electrolyte, SEI, electrode and the output performance of batteries. 
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the solvation behavior and the four pathways for ether-based electrolytes to influence the battery performance. 
Based on the above-mentioned four influence paths, we will completely determine the reasons for the excellent performance of EBEs in SIBs. The development, characteristics and special co-intercalation mechanism of EBEs are extensively summarized. As a key concept for understanding the properties of the electrolyte and interfacial formation mechanism, the importance of the electrolyte solvation effect is emphasized. Further, the critical role of EBEs is systematically analyzed in terms of Coulombic efficiency, cycling stability and rate capability to give a better understanding of the structure–property relationships of EBEs. Meanwhile, the advances of EBEs in other batteries are also discussed. Finally, we put forward the challenges and future perspectives of high-performance SIBs with EBEs. Through these discussions, we aim to provide insights into the special chemistry of EBEs, and the synergetic effects among the electrolyte, electrode and interface. It is believed that this review will provide guidance for the design and optimization of the electrolyte and electrolyte/electrode interfaces of advanced SIBs.
2. Development course of ether-based electrolyte
During their application in rechargeable batteries for more than 40 years, ether-based electrolytes have been extensively applied in early Li–metal batteries, eliminated in Li-ion batteries and revitalized in Li–O2 and Li–S batteries (Fig. 5). The development process of ether-based electrolytes in these batteries have laid a solid research foundation for their subsequent application in SIBs.
Ether-based electrolytes were initially favored in the early reports on lithium-metal batteries. In the 1970s, lithium metal was demonstrated to have the lowest electrochemical potential (−3.04 V vs. H/H+) and ultra-high theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1), which are considered the Holy Grail for lithium-based batteries.33,34 However, the extreme electrochemical potential indicates the high chemical and electrochemical activities of lithium metal. Thus, the active Li metal can react with many electrolytes, leading to the massive loss of Li during cycling. In the limited plating/stripping cycles, the uneven nucleation of Li atoms on the surface of Li gives rise to the growth of dendrites, which can result in unpredictable short circuit, and eventually thermal runaway or explosion.35 Besides, the preferential dissolution of Li dendrites near the substrate during the discharge process leads to the loss of the electrical contact of the portion of Li metal, in the form of inactive “dead Li”. The formation and development of dead Li with a high surface area and high activity inevitably causes a decrease in the active Li, corresponding to a reduction in the electrode capacity and poor Coulombic efficiency.36–40 At that time, profound efforts were devoted to finding a feasible electrolyte to work well with Li metal and suppress the deposition of lithium dendrites.41,42 Consequently, it was realized that anhydrous and aprotic solvents are the two key requirements of nonaqueous electrolytes to achieve better Li metal stability and Li deposition quality.43 According to the requirements of aprotic solvents, alkyl ethers and carbonic/carboxylic esters have become the two main classes of electrolytes, while the frequently used organic amines and alcohols were excluded. Other solvents were sporadically chosen such as nitriles, sulfones, and sulfoxides. However, with the conventional ester-based PC electrolytes, lithium-based batteries showed a rapid capacity decay and unsatisfactory stripping/plating efficiency (≤85%).44 The main causes for this are the severe reduction of PC solvents on the lithium surface and the nonuniform morphology of lithium deposition.45 Conversely, ether-based electrolytes seemed to be a better choice to effectively ameliorate the morphology of lithium dendrites during cycling, in which lithium metal electrode could realize over 300 depth discharge cycles and maintain stability under 120 °C.46,47 It was demonstrated that LiAsF6 in 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) electrolyte generated oligomers of polydioxolane upon reduction, which are insoluble and adhere to the lithium surface, forming a more flexible SEI film to suppress the formation of dendrites. Moreover, the cycling efficiency of the lithium metal anode was reported to be up to 96% in DOL electrolyte, and that of tetrahydrofuran (THF), polymethoxy ethers and dimethoxyethane (DME) or diethyl ether was 88%,48,49 97%50 and 98%,51 respectively. Therefore, among the investigated electrolyte systems, ether-based electrolytes were widely used for lithium metal-based batteries. However, despite the improved lithium morphology, the deposition of dendrites failed to be completely eliminated in ether electrolytes, especially at high charge rates, thus inevitably resulting in poor long-term cycle performance and even short circuit of rechargeable lithium batteries.52–55 Nevertheless, despite the potential safety hazard of lithium metal, the efforts on the commercialization of lithium-based batteries did not stop. Unfortunately, the frequent occurrence of fire incidents in cell phones employing rechargeable lithium batteries led to the large-scale recalls of these devices. Then, the application of early lithium-metal batteries ended.43
To avoid the risk of lithium dendrites, adopting a suitable intercalation anode in the cell design rather than lithium metal anode is used to bypass the formation of dendrites, which is known as “lithium-ion battery”.56 Among the candidate anodes, carbon materials attracted significant attention due to their low lithiation potential, high theoretical capacity, high natural abundance and easily tailored structure and morphology. However, the application of carbonaceous anodes resulted in several difficulties in the electrode and electrolyte interface. At that time, carbonates and ethers were still the two major electrolyte systems due to their wide liquid range, high dielectric constant and ability to dissolve various lithium salts. Unfortunately, the most promising graphite anode showed a poor capacity and cycling performance in both the standard carbonate PC-based electrolytes and ether-based electrolyte.57 The causes of the failure in PC electrolytes lie in the side reactions derived from Li+–PC co-intercalation and the severe electrolyte decomposition, generating gaseous products and leading to the exfoliation of graphite, which cannot form a protective SEI.58 DME-based ether electrolytes are more stable against electrochemical reduction due to the fact that the Li+–ether co-intercalation behavior could result in the formation of relatively more stable ternary graphite intercalation compounds. However, owing to the formation of a less effective SEI, ether-based electrolytes were not considered as feasible electrolytes.59 Around 1990, it was found that graphite could achieve a superb cycling performance in EC-based electrolytes because of the formation of a protective EC-derived SEI on the surface of graphite, preventing the continuous decomposition of the electrolyte.60 Hence, EC-based electrolytes, free from PC and ethers, became the mainstream electrolyte compositions for lithium-ion batteries using graphitic carbon anodes. Consequently, at the anode side, ether-based electrolytes could not satisfy the needs of the promising graphite material. Moreover, ether solvents show relatively poor electrochemical stability against oxidation (∼4.0 V vs. Li/Li+), while carbonate solvents remain stable up to 5.0 V. Therefore, at the cathode side, ether-based electrolytes cannot match the high-voltage cathode, which is important to achieve high energy density cells.61 It is difficult for ether solvents to serve as solvents or co-solvents in high-voltage cells. In the later-developed lithium-ion batteries, ether-based electrolyte was eliminated from the commonly used electrolytes because of its inferior SEI stability on the graphitic carbon material and poor oxidation stability, which cannot satisfy the needs of high-voltage cells.
 Fig. 5  Development history of ether-based electrolytes: failure in early Li-based battery (reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2000) and Li-ion battery (reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2007), and reviving in Li–O2 battery (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016) and Li–S battery (reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021). 
Although dominating the energy storage market worldwide, the Li-ion battery system is approaching its energy density limit (250–300 W h kg−1) because it is restricted by the intercalation mechanism.62,63 Li–O2 batteries, which possess the highest theoretical energy density among the possible secondary battery technologies with the formation of the discharge product lithium peroxide (Li2O2), have received much attention.64–66 However, Li–O2 batteries face the severe challenges of sluggish reaction kinetics of the O2 electrode and the parasitic reaction between intermediates/products and cell components, which inevitably result in a poor cycle life, low rate capability and inferior Coulombic efficiency.67,68 The performance of the Li–O2 battery is strongly related to its electrolyte. Notably, the electrolyte in Li–O2 not only serves as an ionic conductor but also extensively participates in the redox reactions. The mechanism of O2 reduction to Li2O2, lithium dendrite growth, SEI passivation layer and interference by side reactions are closely dependent on the nature of the electrolyte components.69–71 For instance, the donor number (DN) of the solvent and salt determines the solubility and dissociation of the reaction intermediates (LiO2) and the position where Li2O2.72 Generally, solvents with a high DN value will induce the growth of Li2O2 in solution, avoiding electrode passivation and contributing to the high capacity and rate capability. In contrast, low DN solvents will lead to the growth of an Li2O2 film on the electrode, leading to a low rate and capacity.73,74 In addition, the occurrence of parasitic reactions is the prime obstacle in the reversible operation of Li–O2 cells, which are ascribed to the reactivity between the electrolyte or carbon host materials with the reaction products.75–78 Therefore, finding a workable electrolyte is an urgent research need in this field. Early research used conventional alkyl carbonate-based solvents as the electrolyte, but the Li–O2 cells experienced rapid capacity decay because of the irreversible decomposition of the carbonate solvents.79,80 The dramatic instability of carbonate solvents can be attributed to the nucleophilic attack of the superoxide anion on the electron-deficient sites of carbonates, leading to severe degradation and accumulation of side products on the electrode, and consequently a large overpotential and capacity decay.81 In contrast, ether-based electrolytes show better stability with reduced O2 species compared with carbonate-based solvents.82 The low viscosity, high dielectric constant and high oxygen solubility of ether solvents can effectively facilitate the oxygen transport in Li–O2 cells. The great resistance to nucleophilic attack and good cathodic stability of ether-based electrolytes both contribute to their wide use in Li–O2 cells.83,84 In addition, the chain length, number of oxygen and steric morphology of various ether solvents lead to differences in their stability toward reduced oxygen species.85 However, despite their higher stability, the moderate DN value of ethers leads to relatively low capacities compared with high DN solvents, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).86 However, the high-DN solvent DMSO also tends to suffer from nucleophilic attack by reduced oxygen species, forming side products of sulfone and dimethyl sulfone, and then leading to capacity fading.87 Therefore, ether-based electrolytes present a balanced performance in terms of chemical stability and electrochemical performance, which are proven to be the appropriate electrolyte solutions among the available choices for Li–O2 batteries.88 Nevertheless, the lower rate capability and stability towards Li2O2 of ether-based electrolytes should be further enhanced to obtain high-performance Li–O2 batteries.
For the sake of high energy density, Li–S batteries with a sulfur cathode and lithium metal anode have attracted interest, which can offer a high theoretical energy density of 2500 W h kg−1.89 However, to date, the practical application of Li–S batteries has not been realized because of some intractable challenges, such as the growth of lithium dendrite and dissolution and shuttle effect of intermediate polysulfides.90,91 It is believed that a suitable electrolyte is of great significance in obtaining high-performance Li–S batteries. Specially, the commercial carbonate-based electrolyte used in lithium-ion batteries is not suitable for Li–S cells because the polysulfides can react with the carbonate solvents through nucleophilic addition or substitution, forming thiocarbonates and other small molecules, leading to the loss of active polysulfides products and rapid capacity decay.92 Conversely, ether-based electrolytes have become a great choice because of their high stability towards polysulfides and lithium metal anodes. Peled et al.93 first verified DOL as a suitable electrolyte for Li–S batteries in 1989. DOL possesses high ionic conductivity and low viscosity. Most importantly, it can induce the formation of a protective passivation layer on the surface of lithium metal. The passivation layer consists of the polymerization products of DOL, including ROLi, HCO2Li, and poly-DOL oligomers with –OLi edge groups.94 These groups can effectively suppress the formation of dendrites and endow the SEI with favorable flexibility. Another linear ether DME was developed as another co-solvent due to its higher polysulfide solubility and faster reaction kinetics for the redox reaction. Hence, electrolytes containing DME/DOL solvents can provide a balance between ionic conductivity and solubility and mobility od polysulfides, which have become the most extensively used electrolytes in the Li–S battery. However, although the effective solvation of polysulfides in ether-based DOL/DME electrolytes can be beneficial for the utilization of sulfur and reaction kinetics, the limited shuttle effect and the gradually reacted solvents still result in capacity fading and generation of gas.95 Recently, considering the importance of the solvation effect on polysulfide dissolution, two novel electrolyte designs including sparingly solvating electrolyte solutions and highly solvating electrolyte solutions have been proposed to suppress and promote the dissociation of sulfides, respectively. Both strategies may be beneficial for high-performance Li–S batteries owing to the regulation of the sulfur reaction pathway, polysulfide solubility and SEI formation.96 Notably, most of the electrolyte optimizations are still based on ether-based electrolytes, with the exploration of other potential cyclic and linear ether solvents and ether derivatives, such as diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DEGDME),97,98 tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME)99,100 and 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-2,2,2-trifluoroethyl ether (HFE).101,102
To avoid the increasing cost and other problems related to the limited supply of Li, the development of cost-effective sodium batteries is a promising strategy with significant commercial prospects. Owing to the similar properties of Li and Na, the research and development of SIBs have benefitted from the knowledge on LIBs, including the design of electrolytes. Therefore, the most commonly used electrolytes in SIBs consist of carbonate-based solvents with high solubility and electrochemical stability, such as EC, DEC, and PC. However, in carbonate-based electrolytes, the promising graphite anode exhibits very poor Na storage capacity, and therefore have been regarded as “inactive” in SIBs for a long time. However, in 2014, researchers discovered that ether-based electrolytes enable the highly reversible Na+-ether co-intercalation reaction of graphite, achieving stable and long-term cycling performance.103 Subsequently, this pioneering work motivated research on the ether-based electrolytes in SIBs. In 2015, owing to the excellent chemical stability of polysulfides and selenides in ether solvents, micro-sized FeSe215 and pyrite FeS216 were also firstly demonstrated with ultra-stable cycling life in ether-based electrolytes compared with the rapid capacity decay in carbonate-based electrolytes. Besides, it is surprising that alloying anodes such as micro-sized Sn104 and Bi17 with severe volume expansion upon sodiation also realized stable cycling performances in ether-based electrolytes without structural optimization. The superiority of ether-based electrolytes was gradually discovered in enhancing the high-rate performance in hard carbon, favoring pseudocapacitive behavior in TiO2,27 and improving the ICE of high specific surface area carbon anodes.24 Ether-based electrolytes have been demonstrated to be beneficial for high ICEs, stable cycling performance, and high-rate capability in various types of electrodes, including carbon, metal anodes, metal oxides/sulfides/selenides/phosphides and organic electrodes. Therefore, the special chemistry and mechanisms of ether-based electrolytes in SIBs have attracted research attention. It has been revealed that the solvation structure, special sodium storage mechanism, and electrode/electrolyte interaction, especially the ether-derived SEI layer, of ether electrolytes play important roles in their excellent electrochemical performance. For example, the strong solvation and high LUMO level of ether electrolytes enable the reversible Na+-ether co-intercalation reaction in graphite.105 Moreover, the use of ether-based electrolytes is beneficial for deep sodiation in TiO2 and influences the electrochemical behavior.106 Furthermore, the thin, stable, and robust ether-derived SEI is essential for improving the ICE value, accelerating interfacial charge transfer, and stabilizing the electrode structure, which significantly impact the sodium storage capability of electrodes. The practical application of ether-based electrolytes has also been verified given that they show favorable compatibility with various cathodes, such as Na3V2(PO4)3,107 Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7,108 NaCoO2,109 and P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2.110 For example, a full cell assembled with a TiO2 anode, Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode and ether-based electrolyte demonstrated a high energy density of 440 W h kg−1.28 However, there are still some debates and challenges in the application of ether-based electrolytes in SIBs. For instance, the microstructure and composition of the ether-derived SEI and the origin of the special sodium storage behavior should be clarified, and the oxidative stability of ether electrolytes should be improved to further enhance the energy density of SIBs.
In brief, electrolyte design strategies should be tailored to achieve high capacity, high rate capability and stable cycling in battery systems. The optimal electrolyte formula is highly dependent on the specific chemistry and structure of the electrodes and reactions. For example, in early lithium-metal batteries, Li–S batteries and Li–O2 batteries, high chemical stability with high resistance against side reactions was considered as the first requirement for electrolytes, owing to the high activity of the lithium metal, polysulfides and peroxide. In the case of lithium-ion batteries, constructing a stable passivation SEI layer and enhancing the oxidative stability seemed to be more important targets for electrolyte optimization to enhance the cycling stability and promote the energy density. Ether-based electrolytes, with high chemical and reductive stability can satisfy the needs of lithium–metal batteries, Li–S batteries and Li–O2 batteries and benefit long-term cycling. However, their low oxidative stability and formation of less effective SEI on carbon anodes lead to the failure of lithium-ion batteries. It is worth noting that these development courses have guided the research on ether-based electrolytes in SIBs. For instance, insight into the Na+–solvent co-intercalation mechanism of graphite in ether-based electrolytes can be obtained from similar research in LIBs. Metal sulfides and selenides may perform well in ether-based electrolytes according to their high chemical stability in Li–S and Li–O2 batteries. Thus, to present a more comprehensive discussion on the superiority of ether-based electrolytes in SIBs, in the later sections, starting from the basic characteristics of ether-based electrolytes, the uniqueness and the mechanisms for the superior performance of ether-based electrolytes in sodium-ion batteries will be summarized and discussed in detail.
3. Characteristics of ether-based electrolytes
To understand the special chemistry of ether-based electrolytes, the basic characteristics of ether-based electrolytes should be systematically considered initially, which are strongly related to the uniqueness and the mechanisms for the excellent performances of ether-based electrolytes. Generally, electrolytes in SIBs should meet specific requirements, as shown in Fig. 6. (1) Conductivity. High ionic conductivity (10−3 S cm−1) is essential for the fast ion transportation and high-rate performance. (2) Electrochemical stability. The electrochemical stability window (ESW) of an electrolyte should be wide enough to avoid its continuous decomposition and provide a stable operating environment for batteries. (3) Chemical stability. The electrolyte species including solvents, salts and additives should be chemically inert with the active materials and intermediates, otherwise introducing severe side reactions and causing the failure of cells. (4) Protective SEI formation. The formation of a thin, dense and uniform SEI significantly benefits the cycle stability and rate performance of the battery. (5) Thermal stability. The safety of electrolytes can be evaluated through thermal stability and nonflammability. It is noteworthy that these properties are determined by the electrolyte components (solvents, salts, additives and concentration) with distinct solvation effects and physicochemical properties. The common solvents, salts and additives in ether-based electrolytes are presented in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Illustration of the electrolyte components (solvents, salts, additives and concentration) determining the electrolyte performance (conductivity, compatibility, electrochemical stability, thermal stability and chemical stability) through solvation effects and physicochemical properties. The common solvents, salts and additives in ether-based electrolyte and their ball-and-stick models are represented. 
Ether solvents generally consist of linear ether solvents and cyclic ether solvents. However, cyclic ethers are seldomly utilized in SIBs owing to their high chemical reactivity. Therefore, in this review, the ether solvents in ether-based electrolytes mainly refer to linear ethers, including DME, DEGDME, triethylene glycol monomethyl ether (TrEGDME) and TEGDME. Among them, TrEGDME generally exhibits inferior performances in cells, and thus has only been utilized in a few works. In the case of sodium salts, the commonly used salts in ether-based electrolytes include NaPF6, NaClO4, NaTFSI, NaCF3SO3 and NaBF4. Studies on the additives in ether-based electrolytes are relatively rare, with only fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)113 and vinylene carbonate (VC)114 reported. In this section, the basic physicochemical properties of ether-based electrolytes are summarized in terms of ion transportation properties and electrochemical stability, which are the two important properties directly influencing the battery performance. Then, the importance of the solvents, salts, additives and concentration of electrolytes is emphasized and the optimization of the electrolyte components is discussed.
Moreover, the decomposition routes and products of ether-based electrolytes are illustrated to understand the formation mechanism of ether-derived SEI. Notably, the key role of the solvation effect is highlighted with its influence on basic properties and interfacial chemistry.
3.1 Basic properties

3.1.1 Ion transportation. 
The ionic conductivity is greatly affected by the physical properties such as viscosity (η) and dielectric constant (ε) of the electrolyte solvent.115,116 In general, a low viscosity and high dielectric constant significantly facilitate ion transport. The basic parameters of ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes are shown in Table 1. The listed commonly used ether solvents possess a gradually prolonged chain length of dimethoxy ethane (DME), diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DEGDME), and tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME). It can be concluded that ether-based solvents have low viscosity and moderate dielectric constant. Besides, the viscosity of ethers increases with the growth of the solvent chain length. Correspondingly, Carbone et al.117 studied the ion conductivity of a series ether solvents. The room temperature conductivity decreased from about 2 × 10−3 S cm−1 for DME and DEGDME-based electrolytes to about 1 × 10−3 S cm−1 for TEGDME, suggesting the increase in conductivity with a decrease in the ether-chain length. This may be attributed to the decrease in viscosity. In addition, another work similarly compared the transport performance of two electrolytes, i.e., NaCF3SO3/DME and NaCF3SO3/DEGDME.118 The DME electrolyte shows higher ion conductivity and a higher Na+ self-diffusion coefficient. Notably, besides ion conductivity, the sodium ion transport number is another important indicator to evaluate the transport ability of Na+, ranging from 0–1. A high t+ value indicates high-efficiency charge transfer, while an excessively low value will cause severe concentration polarization. The majority of liquid electrolytes show a t+ value of less 0.5 due to the bulky solvation shell wrapping Na+ in addition to anions, which retards the transport of the former. In the case of ether-based electrolyte, the calculated sodium ion transport number (t+) is ∼0.5 for both DME and DEGDME electrolytes in the temperature range of 20 °C to 60 °C, which is a moderate value for SIBs.119 Despite the subtle differences in the conductivity values in the literature, the ionic conductivity of ether electrolytes exceeds 10−3 S cm−1, demonstrating that ether electrolytes with favorable ion transport capability can satisfy the needs of sodium-ion batteries. It is worth noting that although several works have reported the basic physicochemical properties of ether electrolytes, attention has rarely been paid to studying the molecular structure of ether-based electrolytes and their interaction with electrodes.120,121 Moreover, the solvent structure and its relationship with macro-level properties are still unknown.122
Table 1 Common ether-based electrolyte solvents and carbonate-based solvents




Solvent
Molecular formula

T
m (°C)

T
b (°C)

T
f (°C)

η (cP) (25 °C)

ε





DME



−58
84
7
0.46
7.2


DEGDME



−60
162
57
1.06
7.4


TEGDME



−30
275
140
3.39
7.5


EC



36
248
160
1.9 (40 °C)
89.7


PC



−48
242
132
2.53
64.9


DEC



−74
126
31
0.75
2.8


DMC



5
91
18
0.59
3.1






3.1.2 Electrochemical stability. 
As mentioned, a wide ESW in electrolytes is desirable for high electrochemical stability. Electrochemical decomposition (reduction and oxidation) is related to the electronic states of the solvent and solvated cations against the applied potential, that is, the relative lowest unoccupied molecule orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) energies. According to Goodenough's model, the ESW of electrolytes can be inferred by the relative difference between the value of their HOMO and LUMO.123,124 Generally, owing to its loose binding with electrons, the HOMO of molecules shows electron-donor property. Comparatively, the LUMO exhibits electron-acceptor property due to its strong affinity to electrons. Therefore, a higher HOMO level indicates easier electron loss, which means inferior oxidative stability of the molecule. A higher LUMO level implies it is harder to gain electrons, indicating the superior reductive stability of the molecule. Fig. 7a summarizes the HOMO/LUMO levels of different solvents (ethers and carbonates) and different solvated-Na+. In terms of the values of individual solvents, ether solvents including DME, DEGDME and TEGDME all show higher LUMO levels and higher HOMO values than that of carbonate solvents (EC, PC, and DEC), which strongly indicates the superior reductive stability and inferior oxidative stability of ether solvents compared with conventional carbonate solvents.27 The strong reductive stability of ether solvents indicates that they are less likely to decompose during the discharging process, which is also responsible for the formation of a thin SEI layer.27 Additionally, the HOMO and LUMO values of the three above-mentioned ether solvents are comparable, implying their similar oxidative and reductive potential. Given that the solvents in electrolytes coordinate with Na+, it is more appropriate to evaluate the HOMO/LUMO levels of solvated Na+, which is closer to the reaction environment of real cells. Notably, for all types of solvents, the HOMO and LUMO levels of solvated Na+ are much lower than that of pure solvents, which can be attributed to the change in their electron state upon the formation of [Na-solvent]+ complexes.125 The decrease in the HOMO/LUMO values indicates the lower reductive potential and higher oxidative potential of [Na-solvent]+ complexes compared with pure solvents. It is worth noting that the HOMO/LUMO energies can predict but not decide the ESW of electrolytes, given that the battery environment is complicated and the redox potential of electrolytes may be influenced by other materials and species in the battery126 (Fig. 7b). The experimental measurements of the ESW of ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes are summarized in Fig. 7c, which were obtained from limited reports owing to the scarce systematic study on ether-based electrolytes. Ether-based electrolytes show inferior high-voltage stability compared to carbonate electrolytes, with an oxidative potential lower than 5.0 V, which is in accordance with the prediction of their HOMO levels. Although ether-based electrolytes are not suitable for high-voltage (>5 V) electrodes, the widely used cathodes in SIBs such as Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaCoO2 possess a working voltage lower than 4 V,127,128 allowing the possible application of ether solvents in SIBs.
 Fig. 7  (a) LUMO and HOMO levels of ether solvents (DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME) and carbonate solvents (EC, DEC, and PC), and their corresponding solvent-ion complexes. Reproduced data from ref. 27 and 129, with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018 and 2021, respectively. (b) Relation between the HOMO/LUMO levels and the electrolyte stability window. (c) Reported oxidation potentials of ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced data from ref. 27, 118, and 108, with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018, 2021 and 2015, respectively. 

3.2 Characteristics and optimization of electrolyte components

3.2.1 Solvents. 
Given that the discrepancy in the basic properties of different solvents was described above, we mainly focus on the stable solvation behavior of ether solvents in this section. The stable solvation structure of ether electrolytes originates from the low solvation energy and strong electrostatic interaction between Na+ and the ether oxygens (EO) in ether solvents. As is known, ether-based solvents possess a polar ether group (–C–O–C–), where the O atoms with lone pairs attract the electropositive Na+ through electrostatic interaction.130 When the interaction between ether solvents and Na+ is stronger than that between the anion groups and Na+, the salts undergo dissociation and the Na+ undergoes “solvation”, wrapped by a solvation sheath.131
The configuration and spatial structure of the solvation shells can directly affect the diffusion of solvated Na+ and the SEI structure. Considering the strong solvation ability of ethers, the anion groups are generally squeezed out from the solvation sheath in dilute electrolyte. The solvation structure or coordination structure with Na+ is controlled by the ether solvent species, as shown in Fig. 8a–c. The optimized coordination number of Na+ with the EOs is in the range of 4–6, leading to different amounts of different solvents in the solvation shell.132 It has been verified that the optimal ether–Na+ solvated complexes are [Na(DME)3]+, [Na(DEGDME)2]+, and [Na(TEGDME)1]+, indicating the increase in solvation ability with an increase in chain length. Only one TEGDME molecule is needed to completely solvate one sodium ion, which is consistent with the lowest solvation energy of TEGDME. Owing to the interaction between EOs and Na+, ether solvents deliver a lower solvation energy compared with standard carbonate solvents (Fig. 8d).133 The solvation structure of solvated Na+ has a crucial impact on the ion diffusion and cell performance. For example, the non-spherical solvation shells of TrEGDME may result in large steric hindrance, and therefore large overpotentials and poorly defined redox potentials, which are responsible for the poor performance of graphite.134 Similarly, as summarized in Fig. 9a, b, and d, owing to its bulky steric configuration and high viscosity, TEGDME-Na+ may exhibit sluggish ion transport and a high desolvation energy barrier. Hence, compared with DME and DEGDME electrolytes, TEGDME-based cells may show an inferior rate capability. DME and DEGDME seem to favor fast ion transport. However, the lower charge screening effect of DME may imply high energy consumption in the desolvation process. DEGDME should be the optimum choice with the comprehensive consideration of viscosity, solvation structure and stability, with a high application proportion in SIBs (Fig. 9c).133 In addition, given that the main components of the SEI are the reduction products of the solvation shells, the solvation structure determines the formation and composition of the SEI layers. The voltage for SEI formation is controlled by the reductive stability of solvated Na+. Also, the main organic and inorganic species in the SEI layers originated from the decomposition of the solvents and anions. Therefore, the relative quantity of solvents and anions in the solvation structure determines whether the composition of the SEI layers is organic or inorganic dominated. Moreover, the ordered priority in the decomposition of these two species affects the uniformity of the SEI. Because of their strong solvation ability and high reductive stability, ether solvents tend not to easily decompose and lead to the formation of a thin SEI, which significantly shortens the diffusion length of Na+ and accelerates the sodiation process. Also, the ether-derived organic species in the SEI can be beneficial for Na+ diffusion and endow a favorable sodium storage performance.16 However, few reports have emphasized the significant role of the solvation structure in promoting the cell performance, which may be attributed to the knowledge deficiency in electrolyte chemistry and lack of advanced testing technology.
 Fig. 8  Optimized structure of ether solvents and their Na-solvent complexes: (a) DME, (b) DEGDME, and (c) TEGDME. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) Solvation energy of Na-solvent complexes of different ethers and carbonates. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Comparison of the chemical and physical properties of different ethers (DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME), respectively. (c) Summary of the proportion of different ethers applied in sodium ion batteries. (d) Summary of the characteristics and merits of different ethers. (e and f) Comparison of the chemical and physical properties of DEGDME and conventional carbonates (EC, PC, and DEC), respectively. 


3.2.2 Salts. 
Sodium salts are the major component in electrolytes, which are composed of sodium ions and anion groups. The sodium salts should be highly soluble, chemically and electrochemically stable, thermally stable, inexpensive and nontoxic. Different anion groups induce distinct electrolyte properties. The reported Na salts in ether-based electrolytes include NaTFSI, NaFSI, NaBF4, NaCF3SO3, NaClO4, and NaPF6. Generally, the dissolution behavior of sodium salts is regulated by the cation–solvent and cation–anion interactions.135 A strong cation–solvent interaction, which is generally enabled by the high dielectric constant of the solvent molecule, can overcome the lattice energy of sodium salts, resulting in their dissolution. In dilute solution, the cations are highly solvated by the solvent. With an increase in concentration, the strengthened cation–anion interactions lead to ionic association, which involves the formation of solvent-separated ion pairs (SSIP), contact ion pairs (CIP) or aggregate (AGG) solvates in which the ions are coordinated to zero, one, or more than one counterion (Fig. 10a–c), respectively. The ionic association strength of anion groups is influenced by the negative charge delocalization and steric effect.136 The decreasing ionic association strength of the commonly used anion groups follows the order of OTf− > BF4− > ClO4− > PF6−, indicating the decent solubility and dissociation degree of the PF6− anion group. Moreover, the thermal stability of the SSIP and CIP solvates is also linked with the ionic association strength of the sodium salts. The melting point of the anion groups follows the order of OTf− < BF4− < ClO4−.136
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of (a) SSIP, (b) CIP, and (c) AGG. (d) Summary of the proportion of different salts applied in sodium ion batteries. (c) Conductivity and viscosity of 1 M various salts in PC-based electrolytes. (d) Electrochemical window of 1 M various salts in PC-based electrolytes. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. 
In addition, the salt solvation structure significantly influences the interfacial charge transfer kinetics of electrodes. For example, in lithium-ion batteries, the exchange current density in the electrolyte containing 1 to 5 M TFSI− is 100 times higher than that containing only PF6−. The higher exchange current density can be attributed to the preferential solvation of TFSI- and Li+, corresponding to the lower binding energy with Li+, and thus leads to a facile desolvation process and fast interfacial kinetics.137 However, related research on the correlation between salt solvation and electrochemical performance in SIBs is still lacking. Moreover, the electrochemical performance of sodium cells is also significantly impacted by the anion groups in the electrolyte. The inorganic species in SEI layers are dominated by the anion groups in their solvation shells, which leads to a discrepancy in the corresponding SEI layers. Tarascon et al.138 revealed the strong dependence of the SEI stability on the sodium salts in ether-based electrolyte by the correlation of the physical properties of the electrolyte with the chemical composition of the SEI. NaF is believed to be a crucial component for stabilizing the sodium metal. Stable cycling was achieved in NaPF6- and NaCF3SO3-based electrolytes, with similar SEI compositions. Also, the NaPF6 electrolyte enabled high Coulombic efficiency, low charge hysteresis and long-term cycling. In comparison, the cells with NaTFSI and NaClO4 delivered an inferior performance owing to the formation of unstable NaF-free SEI layers. Besides, in the research on hard carbon, NaPF6 and NaCF3SO3 dissolved in ether-based electrolytes also demonstrated favorable performances than other electrolytes.108,139 Correspondingly, by summarizing the type of sodium salts in 100 reports applying ether-based electrolytes, NaCF3SO3 and NaPF6 are the most popular sodium salts in ether-based electrolytes, indicating their favorable compatibility with ether solvents (Fig. 10d).


3.2.3 Additives. 
Additives are hailed as an efficient and simple approach for designing electrolytes with specific functions to achieve promising electrochemical performances. The electrolyte additives, which are foreign molecules added in a small dose to the electrolyte, function to enhance the target properties of the electrolyte, such as electrode passivation, thermal stability, and flammability.140 Ideal electrolyte additives for electrode passivation should have a Fermi energy (Eg) located within the HOMO and LUMO of the salts and solvents for preferential reduction or oxidation at the surface of the electrode and effective regulation of the interfacial properties (Fig. 11a).31 To form a stable and protective interfacial layer, many film-forming additives were developed in sodium-ion batteries, including FEC,141 VC,142 succinic anhydride (SA),143 and sodium difluorophosphates (NaDFP).144 However, the majority of studies focused on the modification of carbonate-based electrolytes. There are only a few reports on additives in ether-based electrolyte. The VC additive has been demonstrated to stabilize both the cathode electrolyte interface (CEI) and solid electrolyte interface (SEI) in ether-based electrolytes. Bai et al.114 reported the formation of a structurally/chemically stable and mechanical durable SEI film on the surface of a hard carbon anode by applying DME-0.5%VC electrolyte, benefiting the superb cycling performance of the hard carbon anode in sodium ion batteries. The involvement of VC in the solvation structures led to a reduction in the LUMO energy levels, which induced the formation of protective SEI layers (Fig. 11b). Moreover, VC was reported to benefit the cycle stability of FeS@C‖Na3V2(PO4)3@C full cells because of the formation of an undivided and consecutive CEI layer on the Na3V2(PO4)3@C cathode. Owing to its similar HOMO level with ether solvent, the additive VC is synergistically oxidized with DEGDME solvent, which could limit the solvent oxidation and effectively improve the oxidation stability of the electrolyte.145 For the sodium metal electrode, sodium polysulfide (Na2S6),146 nitrofullerene,147 and the combination of FEC and fluorinated ether (HFPM)113 were explored as effective additives to stabilize sodium metal. The achieved long-term cycling performance is attributed to the protective SEI, which effectively facilitates the uniform deposition of Na and suppresses the growth of Na dendrites.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of energy diagram of electrolyte with functional additives. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (b) Calculated solvation energy and LUMO energy levels of Na-DME complexes and VC-containing electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of the influence of concentration. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 


3.2.4 Concentration. 
Regulating the concentration of the electrolyte is an effective strategy to control the electrochemical behavior and the reversible capacity of batteries (Fig. 11c). The critical role of the solvation structure of electrolyte should be highlighted. It should be noted that the interfacial chemistry is closely dependent on the structure of the primary solvation shells of cations. Thus, a change in the solvation structure will lead to altered interfacial properties, and further influence the electrochemical performance of cells.148 At present, considering favorable ionic conductivity, the commonly used standard concentration of electrolyte is 1 M (mol L−1), which enables the classical three-layer solvation structure due to the sufficient amount of solvent molecules.149 Alternatively, increasing the salt concentration of the electrolyte has been demonstrated to be an effective solution to establish a stable and robust interphase in Li–metal and aqueous batteries.150,151 Ether-based electrolytes have been explored as highly concentrated electrolytes due to their excellent solvation ability.152 Highly concentrated ether-based electrolytes can guarantee the tight binding of the solvent and salts and decrease the volatility of the electrolyte.153 In sodium–metal batteries, high concentration ether-based electrolyte has been reported to effectively prevent the formation of dendrites and maintain good cycle stability.154 These superior performances can be attributed to the special solvation structure in the high-concentrated electrolyte. With an increase in concentration, the ion association is strengthened and the amounts of AGG and CIP significantly increase. The solvent molecules are not sufficient to completely solvate the cations. Also, the individual solvation shells will be compressed and forced to share the solvent, leading to the inevitable involvement of counterions in the classical primary solvation shells.148 The anion-dominant solvation sheaths contribute to the formation of inorganic-rich SEI layers, which are beneficial to maintain the integrity of the SEI and electrodes, and further enable a better cycle performance. Besides the enhancement in the SEI, a change in the solvation structure in high-concentration electrolyte also induces other novel properties such as mass transport and electrochemical stability of the electrolyte. For example, graphite delivered a superior rate performance in 4.5 M LiFSA/AN electrolyte.155 Moreover, high-concentrated electrolyte delivered much higher oxidative stability compared with the conventional dilute electrolyte, namely, 4 V vs. Li/Li+ in dilute electrolyte increased to ∼5 V vs. Li/Li+ in high-concentration electrolyte. This can be attributed to the decrease in the HOMO energy level resulting from the donation of lone pairs of ether oxygen atoms to the Li+ cation.156 Therefore, increasing the concentration of ether-based electrolytes may be an effective method to enhance their limited oxidative stability. High-concentration electrolytes can be applied in Na metal anodes to postpone the formation of dendrites and mitigate the side reactions of Na and organic solvents due to the significantly decreased number of solvent molecules in the solvation shells. Notably, high-concentrated salts have been proven to be only effective in ether solvents and failed in carbonate solvents. When the salt concentration of NaFSI was increased to 5 M, the DME-based electrolyte delivered a highly stable cycle performance, while the EC/PC-based electrolyte experienced rapid cell failure within 20 cycles.157 To avoid the high viscosity and high salt cost of this electrolyte, a localized high-concentration electrolyte (LHCE) was reported by utilizing hydrofluoroether (BTFE) as an “inert” diluent, which maintained the solvation structure of the cation–anion aggregates but decreased the viscosity of the electrolyte. The LHCE (2.1 M NaPF6/DME-BTFE) exhibited a better cycling performance than the 5 M NaPF6/DME electrolyte. Recently, benefiting from the small Stokes radius of Na+, favorable ion transportation kinetics could be obtained in low-concentration electrolytes in SIBs. Ultralow-concentration carbonate-based electrolytes have been also explored to achieve good performance in a wide working temperature range.158 However, the use of ultra-low concentration ether-based electrolyte has not been reported to date, which needs further exploration.

3.3 Formation of ether-derived SEI
Generally, a reduction in the solvent molecules and anion groups in the solvation sheath will result in the formation of organic and inorganic species in the SEI layers, respectively. The decomposition route of solvents and salts needs to be understood in detail to illuminate the reduction components and their contribution to the SEI layers. As illustrated in Fig. 12a, for ether solvents, the electrons generated during the discharge process attack an electrophilic center such as the carbon atom of the ether solvent, leading to the breakage of chemical bonds.138 According to the analysis of the bond-dissociation energy of the diglyme molecule, the C–O and C–C bonds in the diglyme molecule are relatively prone to cleavage compared with the stable C–H bonds. The cleavage process leads to the formation of radical species and organic sodium alkoxides (RCH2ONa).159 The highly reactive radical species formed in the bond-breaking process may further induce the polymerization of polymer-like species. Moreover, the Lewis acids (BF3 or PF5) generated from the decomposition of NaBF4 or NaPF6 are believed to catalyze the cleavage of C–O bonds and form reactive radicals by interactions with the basic oxygen atoms, leading to further polymerization reactions. Considering the inferior performance of NaClO4- and NaTFSI-based electrolytes, the catalyst behavior and polymer-like species may be the key to the better electrochemical performance in NaPF6-diglyme electrolyte.160 In addition, catalyzed by the above-mentioned radicals and inevitable contaminants (H2O/CO2), the decomposition products of NaPF6 may be NaF, Na2O and Na2CO3. Also, NaxBOyFz may be the extra component for the reduction of NaBF4. For NaClO4 salt, NaCl substitutes common NaF as the main inorganic species.138,160 Therefore, in the common NaPF6-diglyme electrolyte, the SEI layers contain the sodium alkoxide-dominated organic species and NaF-dominated inorganic species. For comparison, the decomposition routes and products of the conventional carbonate-based electrolytes (EC and DMC) are presented in Fig. 12b and c, respectively. The main products of carbonates are organic ROCO2Na and inorganic Na2CO3. Notably, according to the LUMO values of the solvent–cation complexes, the higher LUMO value of ether-based complexes indicates their higher stability towards reduction, leading to less decomposition and the formation of thin SEI layers. A thin ether-derived SEI gives rise to a high ICE and facilitates fast ion transport due to the shortened diffusion length. In addition, the less reduction in solvent implies inorganic-dominant structures in the ether-derived SEI, which are beneficial for the mechanical stability of the SEI and the better-maintained integrity of the electrode during cycling. The robust SEI layers have a valuable contribution to the stable cycling performance of electrodes, especially alloying anodes with obvious volume expansion. Moreover, the reported layer-by-layer structure of ether-derived SEI demonstrates high ionic conductivity, which is conducive to fast sodium storage kinetics and excellent rate performance. A more detailed discussion on the correlation between battery performance and SEI properties is conducted in Section 5.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of decomposition pathways of (a) ether solvent (DEGDME) and (b) carbonate solvents (DMC and EC). (c) Summary of the decomposition products of DEGDME, DEC and EC. 
4. Special co-intercalation in carbon anode
The reversible solvent co-intercalation behavior in carbon anodes is one of the most attractive unique properties of ether-based electrolytes. Generally, electrolytes should be electrochemically inert in redox reactions to avoid undesirable side reactions. However, in carbon anodes, the special solvent co-intercalation mechanism enables the reversible formation of ternary graphite intercalation compounds (t-GICs), contributing to the highly stable cycling performance and rate capability of carbon materials. Co-intercalation behavior has been discovered in graphite, soft carbon and hard carbon anodes. In this section, the performance, behavior, mechanisms and conditions for the reversible solvent co-intercalation behavior are comprehensively summarized. As the key role in participating the redox reaction, the influence of the electrolyte type is also discussed.
4.1 Graphite
Graphite has found wide use in LIB anodes due to the formation of the stable binary intercalation compound LiC6, exhibiting a high theoretical capacity (372 mA h g−1) and low oxidation–reduction potential.161 As early as 1988, some scholars studied the sodium storage performance of graphite and found that the binary graphite sodium-intercalation product is NaC64, but its theoretical capacity is only 35 mA h g−1.162 In 1993, Doeff et al.163 showed that sodium ions are inserted in graphite to form NaC70 with a negligible capacity of 31 mA h g−1. Therefore, for a long time, graphite was considered to be inactive for sodium storage. It was also theoretically demonstrated that the main reason for the poor sodium storage performance of graphite is its weak bonding with sodium ions, and thus it cannot form stable Na-graphite intercalation compounds (Na-GICs).164–166
Only recently, it was discovered that graphite can realize reversible sodium storage capability in ether-based electrolytes by virtue of its solvent-involved electrochemical co-intercalation behavior, providing new insight into the sodium storage mechanism in carbon materials. Jache et al.103 found that in ether-based electrolytes, sodium ions reversibly intercalate into natural graphite via a solvent co-intercalation reaction, forming the ternary intercalation compound Na(diglyme)2C20. The graphite anode showed a surprising performance of a reversible capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at a current density of 37 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles, and the ICE was about 90%, which was superior to that of graphite in lithium-ion batteries (Fig. 13a). Moreover, the sodium ion solvent co-intercalation reaction is only possible in specific ether-based electrolytes. When using standard carbonate-based electrolytes (EC/DEC), graphite delivered a poor sodium storage capacity. From an energy viewpoint, the binary Na+-intercalated graphite is energetically unstable, whereas Na+-ether co-intercalated graphite is thermodynamically stable (Fig. 13b).
 Fig. 13  Co-intercalation behavior of ether solvents in graphite. Performance and behavior: (a) stable charge–discharge curves. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of favorable Na+-ether co-intercalation in graphene layers and unfavorable sole Na+ intercalation in carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. Mechanism: (c) structural evolution of graphite during sodiation/desodiation process proven by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction analysis. (d) Schematic of height and lattice parameters of graphite at different stage GICs. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (e) In situ Raman spectra (normalized) and the Lorentzian fitting of GC (blue line) and GUC (red line) of few-layered graphene, showing the highly ordered staging reaction. (f) Change in Raman positions of GC and GUC during the electrochemical intercalation reaction with the corresponding galvanostatic discharge profile. (e and f) reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. (g) Summary of the solvent dependency in the co-intercalation phenomenon. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. 
The mechanism for the co-intercalation behavior in ether-based electrolytes also has been detected in detail. The stage evolution mechanism was proven through in situ XRD (Fig. 13c), which suggested that a series of n-order ternary intercalation compounds (stage n-GICs) was formed when solvated Na+ gradually intercalated in the graphite layers.23 Kim et al.167 reported the first accurate quantification of the formation of solvated sodium ions in graphite. During the discharge process, stage 3-GICs gradually transformed to stage 2, and then to stage 1, while these GICs changed to the opposite direction during the charge process (Fig. 13d). The n-stage mechanism of intercalation was also revealed by in situ Raman spectroscopy.23,168 The characteristic G peak of graphite in Raman spectra is not only corelated with the structural order degree, but also the phonon lifetime in the charged graphene layers, which is influenced by the transition process of G-mode phonons into electron-hole pairs during the Kohn anomaly process.169 Therefore, the G peak can reflect the staging process of intercalation in graphite, as a feature of the charged graphene layers. As shown in Fig. 13e, pristine graphite shows a single G peak at 1580 cm−1, which can be attributed to the C–C stretching mode (E2g2, G band). With the Na+-ether co-intercalation insertion process, the splitting of the G peak and the formation of GUC and GC peaks are observed, which feature the start of the staging reactions of graphite. As the reaction continues, the intensity of the GUC peak gradually decreases, while the intensity of the GC peak significantly increases, implying an increase in the amount of charged graphene layer and the continuous intercalation process. The GUC peak disappears at 0.62 V, indicating the absence of uncharged graphene layers and the reaction reaches stage-2. Then, the last blue-shift and the noticeably asymmetric shape of the GC peak strongly indicate the formation of a stage-1 compound.170 It should be noted that solvent co-intercalation behavior leads to a large expansion in the layer spacing. Surprisingly, the graphite anode maintained excellent reversibility during cycling together with large volume expansion. This may be attributed to the exfoliation of graphite into crystalline platelets besides delamination. In addition, the in situ electrochemical dilatometry (ECD) method proved the pseudocapacitive storage mechanism by detecting the volume expansion of graphite during cycling.171 It is worth noting that the reason graphite delivered a great performance in ether electrolyte is not only because co-intercalation hindered the mutual repulsion between sodium ions and graphite layers, but also the intercalation pseudocapacitive behavior was beneficial for rapid sodium-intercalated kinetics. Although the co-intercalation behavior of graphite has been researched in detail, the discussion on the form of intercalated species in graphite layers has not reached a consensus to date. Kim et al.167 considered that the most stable form is the [Na-DEGDME]+ complex, where three oxygen atoms of DEGDME are simultaneously coordinated with Na ions. Nonetheless, there are different opinions that the intercalated complex consists of one Na+ and two DEGDME molecules.103,172
Besides, the conditions of the reversible and stable co-intercalation reactions have been studied. Firstly, the effects of the electrolyte solvent and sodium salt species on the sodium storage behavior were researched. It was found that the solvent species significantly impact the electrochemical performance by utilizing different species of carbonate-based solvents (EC, DEC, and PC) and ether-based electrolyte solvents (DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME). Consequently, only ethers are available and DEGDME shows the best reversible capacity and rate performance.103 The impact of different sodium salts (NaPF6, NaClO4, and NaCF3SO3) was also studied. It seems that sodium salts had little impact on sodium storage.108 Further reports demonstrated that the reversible intercalation of Na-solvent complexes to graphite was limited to linear ethers and their derivative solvent materials. Cyclic ethers such as DOL and THF are excluded. It has been noted that the high solvation energy of Na and the chemical stability of Na-solvent complexes are critical for the reversible co-intercalation. If the solvation energy is low, the sodium-ether complex is prone to desolvation and forms an unstable intercalation compound, resulting in the failure of intercalation. Even in the case of a high solvation energy, the complex in graphite should be chemically stable; otherwise, its chemical decomposition releases gases, which may cause the exfoliation of co-intercalation graphite (Fig. 13e).105 In the available linear ethers, the sodium storage behavior displays different features. The intercalation potential of solvated Na-ether ions in graphite can be tuned by tailoring the length of the solvent species. This can be explained by the fact that longer solvent molecules have a stronger repulsion effect on the positively charged Na ions in the discharge product, determining the thermodynamic stability of the intercalation products.167 The solvation structure of the electrolyte is also believed to play an important role in the co-intercalation reactions in different linear ether electrolytes. Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy (EC-STM) and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance technology (EQCM) were utilized to study the co-intercalation behavior of linear ethers and their derivatives. It is believed that the key parameter of co-intercalation behavior is the coordination number of sodium ion and oxygen. A too-small coordination number will result in slow kinetics or even suppression of the intercalation process, and excessive coordinated Na ions may cause large steric hindrance and hinder intercalation.134
The SEI property of graphite in ether-based electrolytes is also a focus of research. However, there is disagreement on the existence and features of the SEI. Given that the solvent co-intercalates in the graphite layers, large volume expansion is inevitable. Considering the ultra-stable and reversible performance and no obvious detection of an SEI, some researchers believed that there may be no SEI film generated on the surface of graphite. However, another opinion supports the presence of an ultra-thin and mechanically stable SEI. This debate will be discussed in detail later in Section 5.3.1.
The highly stable cycling performance (several thousand cycles without obvious capacity decay), superb high-rate capability (∼100 mA h g−1 at even 10 A g−1) and special co-intercalation mechanism of graphite in ether electrolytes have aroused wide scientific interest. Besides natural graphite, ether-based electrolytes have also found suitable applications in other graphite-like carbon materials. Cohn et al.168 established a battery with a 2–10-layer graphene anode using an ether-based electrolyte (DEGDME). This battery displayed an excellent cycling and rate performance with a reversible capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and 100 mA h g−1 at even 30 A g−1 with a capacity retention rate of 96% after 8000 cycles. In addition, researchers have used laser drilling technology to make a new porous graphite film, which can be directly used as an anode. This anode achieved a sodium storage capacity of 127.1 mA h g−1 with the solvent co-intercalation mechanism.173 Graphite carbon foam prepared from bituminous coal was proven to be a suitable anode in ether electrolyte.174 Also, nitrogen-doped expanded graphite oxide (NEGO) was developed as an SIB anode,175 and researchers compared the electrochemical performance of NEGO in both ether and ester-based electrolytes. Consequently, the ICE was largely improved from 24.73% (in ester-based electrolytes) to 72.08% (in ether-based electrolytes). In an attempt to fabricate a full cell device, for the first time, Hasa et al.109 reported a full-cell, matching the graphite anode with the P2-Na0.7CoO2 cathode in an electrolyte of 1 M NaClO4 in TEGDME. The reversible capacity reached 80 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1C, and the Coulombic efficiency was about 100%. Additionally, Na0.66Ni0.33−xZnxMn0.67O2 was demonstrated as a feasible cathode in a diglyme-based electrolyte, delivering a high capacity of 85 mA h g−1 and 85% retention after 155 cycles when matched with graphitized petroleum coke in full cells.176 The introduction of graphite is believed to be a huge step in the commercialization of sodium ion batteries. It is worth noting that the co-intercalation behavior of ether solvents in graphite was demonstrated to occur in other alkali metal ion batteries, such as potassium-177,178 and magnesium-ion batteries.179
However, there are still many problems associated with the use of graphite. Firstly, the intercalation of solvated sodium ions in graphite will cause larger volume expansion (>300%), which may cause pulverization of the active materials. Secondly, given that the solvent directly participates in the electrochemical reactions, the large solvent consumption cannot be ignored. It was found that one gram of graphite consumed about 200 μL of solvent in cycling. Thirdly, there is still a debate about whether an SEI exists on the surface of graphite. Moreover, when considering the construction of full-cell devices with a graphite anode, the high sodium storage potential (∼0.6 V) and limited capacity (∼120 mA h g−1) will reduce the full-cell energy density.103,167 Therefore, in the aspect of fundamental research, the SEI and co-intercalation behavior should be further investigated in detail. Also, considering the commercialization of graphite, it is promising if the reaction potential can be reduced and graphite composited with other high-capacity anodes.
4.2 Soft carbon
Soft carbon with a high graphitization degree is under-appreciated as a feasible anode in SIBs, despite its high electronic conductivity and tunable interlayer distance. Soft carbons derived from petroleum coke,163 pitch,181 and mesitylene182 all delivered relatively poor capacity in carbonate-based electrolytes. However, since graphite was revived in sodium anodes, some soft carbon materials were found to deliver a considerable capacity and exhibit co-intercalation behavior in ether-based electrolytes. Recently, the commercial N330 carbon black displayed a high reversible capacity (234 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1) and long cycle life (105 mA h g−1 at 3200 mA g−1 and maintained the reversible capacity for 2000 cycles) in ether-based electrolytes.183 It is believed that the sodiation mechanism of N330 includes both sodium ion storage in the disordered carbon layers and the co-intercalation reaction of solvated sodium ions in the graphene layers. Yang et al.184 developed a free-standing porous carbon nanofiber film (CNF) derived from bacterial cellulose. When treated at a temperature of 1300 °C, the optimized CNFs-1300 showed a high ICE (93% at 0.2 A g−1) and excellent rate performance (128 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1), as shown in Fig. 14a. Notably, the reaction in this electrode exhibited more pseudocapacitive than diffusive behavior (Fig. 14b). Besides, researchers suggested an adsorption and co-intercalation mechanism in the CNF-1300 anode, namely solvent molecular co-intercalation occurs in the low voltage platform regions, while Na+ adsorption occurs in the high voltage slope area (Fig. 14e).
 Fig. 14  Co-intercalation behavior of ether solvents in soft carbon: performance and mechanism. (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of CNFs-1300 for the first three cycles at 0.2 A g−1. (b) Sodium storage behavior CNFs-1300 electrode proven by the contribution ratio of the capacitive capacity at different scan rates. (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profile of the PCN-2800//HN-PP cell and rate capabilities at a current rate in the range of 0.2 to 20 A g−1. (d) Co-intercalation in PCN-2800 proven by in situ XRD. (e) Schematic illustration of co-intercalation behavior of CNFs-1300 in the charge and discharge process. (a, b, and e) Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Pyrolytic carbon nanosheets (PCNs) have been developed as a soft carbon anode, which are composed of multitudinous graphitic nanocrystals and produced by a bio-induced precursor. The local structures of PCNs experienced a systematical evolution to graphitic structure with an increase in temperature. The sample of PCN-2800 prepared at 2800 °C showed unusual graphitization behavior and high electrical conductivity (∼320 S cm−1). The graphitic material exhibited a superb high-rate and cycle performance, maintaining 68% of its initial capacity at 600C, and achieved a stable cycle life over 40000 cycles (Fig. 14c). The utility of PCN-2800 as an SIB anode was also demonstrated in a full cell, achieving a high specific energy density of ∼195 W h kg−1 and a high specific power density of 30000 W kg−1.26 The excellent electrochemical performance can be attributed to the polycrystalline graphite structure, stable nanosheet morphology and special sodium storage behavior. In situ XRD tests were conducted, which indicated staging co-intercalation behavior during solvated-Na-ion insertion and extraction. The graphite peak of the (002) plane was split into two peaks during sodiation and recovered to one peak after desodiation, which is similar with co-intercalation in graphite, as shown in Fig. 14d.
4.3 Hard carbon
With regard to the hard carbon anode, it is considered to be a more promising anode material in SIBs with a relatively high reversible capacity (300–400 mA h g−1). The typical charge/discharge curves of hard carbon consist of a slope at high potential and a long platform at low potential (∼0.1 V). Dahn et al.185 first discovered the excellent properties of hard carbon for sodium storage, and then the interest by scientists increased. In the subsequent research, biomass hard carbon,186,187 heteroatom doping,188–191 and architectural design methods192,193 were adopted to improve the electrochemical sodium storage performance of hard carbon. Although hard carbon is regarded as one of the most promising anodes for sodium ion batteries, its sodium storage mechanism still remains controversial. The generally accepted perspective is that the mechanism of hard carbon can be divided into three types of storage behavior, including adsorption in the defects and edges, intercalation in the graphene–graphene layers, and insertion in nanopores. However, the corresponding voltage region of the above-mentioned three mechanisms in the charge/discharge curves is still under debate. The plateau region assigned to the sodium intercalation in the graphene layers was supported by Liu et al.194 and Cao et al.195 In addition, according to the constant interlayer distance of hard carbon during sodiation/desodiation, Tarascon et al.196 believed that there was no intercalation in the graphitic layers.197 Moreover, the pore structure of hard carbon is considered to be one of the main factors influencing the sodium storage capacity. Recently, Wu et al.198 investigated the steady state of sodium ions in hard carbon from thermodynamic and kinetic aspects. They demonstrated the formation mechanism of the quasi-metallic sodium in hard carbon and the chemical interaction between these two components.
The above-mentioned sodium storage mechanisms are all based on the intercalation/de-intercalation of isolated Na ions. Recently, it was exceptional that the solvent co-intercalation behavior in an ether-based electrolyte was demonstrated in a hard carbon electrode, facilitating fast sodium storage and a high-rate performance.110,199,200 In a previous study on lithium-penetrated hard carbon electrode, Li et al.199 conducted ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations to understand the effect of an ether electrolyte (TEGDME) on sodium intercalation. The structural evolution of hard carbon was simulated in the system of NaClO4–TEGDME electrolyte. As the system evolves, the carbon layers on the edge of the hard carbon are wrinkled and expanded. It is believed that the TEGDME–Na+ complex will interact with the carbon layer and expand the interlayer distance of the short carbon slabs at the edge of the hard carbon (Fig. 15a), However, the authors declared that the co-intercalation of the TEGDME–Na+ complex may not happen in the bulk hard carbon due to the intrinsic disordered carbon structure.199 The different electrochemical performances of hard carbon in ether-based and ester-based electrolytes have attracted much attention. Most of the works attributed the difference to the different SEI structures; however, whether the electrolyte species have an effect on the sodium ion transport and storage mechanism is uncertain.
 Fig. 15  (a) Stable TEGDME–Na+ complexes expand the edge of the carbon layers in hard carbon (as shown in the black circle). Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and composition of carbonate-derived SEI and ether-derived SEI, containing a pseudo-SEI originating from the co-intercalation of Na-TEGDME complexes in the surface of carbon layers. (c) Pseudo-SEI demonstrated by HRTEM of hard carbon in 1 M NaPF6-TEGDME electrolyte after 150 cycles. (b and c) reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (d) Calculation of the initial and final structure of Na+–DEGDME in carbon layers. (e) Co-intercalation of Na+–DEGDME proved by FTIR and XRD analysis of hard carbon electrode in discharged and charged state. (d and e) reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Recently, the electrolyte-dependent sodium storage behavior in hard carbon was detected. Yun et al.200 prepared a series of hard carbons at a heating temperature in the range of 1600 °C 2800 °C and tested their electrochemical behavior in EC/PC and DEGDME-based electrolytes. It was found that the galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles are similar in both ether and ester-based electrolytes. The slope and plateau capacity are mainly affected by the prismatic surface area, basal plane and bulk density, independent of the electrolyte system. Notably, the ether-based electrolyte could facilitate the migration of sodium ions in the internal closed pores of the hard carbon with disordered structures. It is expected that the DEGDME–Na+ complex may also intercalate in the carbon layers together with sodium ions. However, the large amounts of defects and active surface in the hard carbon can induce electrolyte decomposition also.200 The underlying mechanism of enhancing the rate and cycling capability of hard carbon in ether-based electrolytes was also investigated.201 They found that the pillar ether solvent helped modulate the interfacial crystallographic structures of hard carbon, which functioned as a “pseudo-SEI” to facilitate fast sodium storage kinetics (Fig. 15b). It was observed in the HRTEM images that there was a distinct interfacial transient layer (“pseudo-SEI”) with ordered graphitic layers located between the SEI and inner disordered hard carbon structures, as shown in Fig. 15c. The “pseudo-SEI” was believed to be derived from the co-intercalation of the TEGDME-Na+ complex. The co-intercalation behavior was further demonstrated by STEM EDS line scanning of O and Na near the surface of the hard carbon and the FT-IR analysis. The co-intercalated solvent could weaken the Coulombic repulsion of Na+ and facilitate fast ion transport through the locally ordered graphene stacks. Moreover, the locally ordered graphitic microstructure with reduced atomic tortuosity in the ether-based electrolyte was beneficial for the interfacial migration of Na+ in contrast to the disordered carbon layer in the ester-based electrolyte. The TEGDME-based electrolyte effectively regulated the interfacial SEI and pseudo-SEI layers with refined chemistry, structure, and modified interfacial microstructure of hard carbon.201
Recently, our group110 reported a unique solvated Na+ and Na+ co-intercalation mechanism in ether electrolytes in well-designed monodispersed hard carbon nanospheres. Molecular dynamics simulation was conducted to provide insight into the thermodynamic stable structure of different electrolytes and the interaction of Na+–DEGDME and Na+ with the carbon layers. As shown in Fig. 15d, the final structure of Na+–DEGDME–carbon showed that the edge of carbon layers is expanded by the ternary intercalation complexes. The configuration indicated the solvated Na+ and Na+ co-intercalation mechanism in the ether-based electrolyte. The special mechanism was further demonstrated by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and XRD measurements. As shown in Fig. 15e, the characteristic peaks of the DEGDME solvent were observed in the fully discharged state and disappeared in the charged state, indicating the reversible co-intercalation of the solvent species. Notably, the possible changes in the molecular structure of Na+-diglyme during co-intercalation were also revealed by FTIR measurements from 1700 to 800 cm−1.202 The intensity of the CH2 in-plane bending at 1457 cm−1 and the CH2 wagging region at 1365 cm−1 increased in the discharged electrode compared with the original electrolyte, strongly implying a change in molecular conformation. Moreover, a new and strong band appeared at 880 cm−1 in the fully discharged electrode. This phenomenon can be ascribed to the coordination of an Na+ and two diglyme molecules, with a dihedral angle sequence of each diglyme molecule O−C−C−O (conformation about C−O bond is trans and the conformation about the C−C is gauche).202 Additionally, in the XRD patterns, the shift in the peaks to the low angle direction can be attributed to the expanded d-spacing of the carbon layers. Also, the larger shift in DEGDME electrolyte than EC/DEC electrolyte indicated the solvated Na+ co-intercalation mechanism due to the larger volume change during the intercalation of the solvated Na+ complex. It is believed that the solvated Na+ and Na+ co-intercalation mechanism in ether electrolyte avoids the sluggish desolvation process and facilitates the sodium storage kinetics.
5. The origin of superior performance in ether-based electrolyte
The electrochemical performance of batteries is generally evaluated by their reversible capacity, Coulombic efficiency, cycling stability and rate capability. The sodium storage performance of batteries is strongly correlated with the choice of electrolyte. Thus, by comparing these key performances of the same electrode in different electrolytes, it can be concluded that ether-based electrolytes exhibit comprehensively improved performances in cycling stability, Coulombic efficiency and high-current capacity in various electrodes compared with conventional carbonate-based electrolytes (Fig. 2b–d). The origin and mechanisms of these superior performances are discussed in this section.
5.1 High ICE
The ICE is the ratio of the desodiation capacity to sodiation capacity in the first cycle in the case of the anode. A low ICE value represents a drastic electrolyte decomposition reaction, resulting in large irreversible sodium consumption. In the laboratory system of half-cells, sodium metal is utilized as the counter electrode, which can provide an endless supply of sodium ions to guarantee subsequent cycles even if a large amount of sodium ions is consumed in the initial cycle.203 However, in the practical pouch-cells, the ICE directly influences the energy density of battery devices. Given that the cathode material has to provide all the irreversible and reversible sodium ions, a higher ICE means less irreversible capacity consumption, more reversible sodium ions and higher energy density. Generally, the ICE is highly dependent on the interface reaction of the electrolyte and electrode, and thus the ICE value can be regulated through both the electrolyte and electrode. In the case of the electrode, the pore structure,204,205 defect configuration,206 and oxygen functional groups207,208 all have an impact on the electrolyte decomposition process. For example, the pore structure can regulate the interfacial reduction behavior of the electrolyte by controlling the ionic desolvation process.209 Different oxygen groups have been demonstrated to impact the reduction route of electrolyte.210 In the case of the electrolyte, its reduction and oxidation behavior such as reductive potential, energy barrier for electrolyte decomposition, and order of decomposed species directly determine the difficult degree of decomposition reaction and the ICE value. Notably, the solvation structure plays a crucial role in the decomposition process by impacting the HOMO/LUMO levels and energy barrier of decomposition. The reduction behavior of different electrolytes induces differences in the thickness, components and mechanical properties of the SEI layer. Therefore, a compatible electrolyte is essential to effectively enhance the ICE and total energy density of cells.
Ether-based electrolytes have been verified to be beneficial for higher ICE values than conventional carbonate-based electrolytes in different electrodes including intercalation-type anodes (graphite, non-graphitic carbon, and TiO2), alloying-type anodes (Bi, Sn) and conversion-type anodes (metal sulfides and selenides). These results can be attributed to the stable solvation structure of the solvated sodium ions and the generated thin SEI films.

5.1.1 Stable solvated-Na+ complex. 
Ether-based electrolytes have been demonstrated to possess a high energy barrier for reduction due to their stable solvation structure, indicating that there may be less irreversible electrolyte decomposition. The stable solvated-Na+ complex can be demonstrated through its low solvation energy, low bond energy with Na ions, high electron affinity energy, and high LUMO values of ether solvents by theoretical calculations.
The solvation structure of sodium ions in different electrolytes is indispensable to understand their solvation behavior and effects on the SEI layer. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted in recent reports. The solvation energy (ΔGs) of different solvation configurations in various electrolytes was calculated to estimate the thermodynamic stability of Na-solvent complexes.105,211 Due to the fact that the O atoms with lone pairs in the ether polar group (–C–O–C–) strongly attract electropositive Na+ through electrostatic interaction, ether solvents with strong chelation tend to intensely absorb Na+. Thus, in different reports, ether solvent (DEGDME) demonstrated the lowest solvation energy compared with EC and DEC when the solvation shell included only one solvent molecule, indicating the strong solvation ability and stabilization toward sodium ions of linear ether solvents (Fig. 16a). The number of coordinated solvent molecules in the solvation shells is limited by the bulky volume and amount of O atoms of solvents. In the case of DEGDME, the maximum number of DEGDME in the solvation shell is limited to 2 due to the large volume of its multidentate ligand structure and 3 ether oxygens (EOs) in the solvent. However, due to the different solvation environments in calculations, the solvation energy and optimized solvation structure are different. If only considering the solvent in the results, the solvation energy further decreased with an increase in the number of solvent molecules in the solvation shell, indicating a more stable solvation configuration.105 However, when considering anion groups (PF6−) simultaneously, the tendency can be opposite. It was found that the solvation energy increases as the coordination number in the solvation shell increase, from the −10.2 kcal mol−1 for [Na–PF6–DEGDME] to −7.4 kcal mol−1 for [Na–PF6–DEGDME2]+ (Fig. 16b). A similar tendency was also observed for the EC and DEC solvation behaviors, implying the unfavorable thermodynamics of increasing the solvation coordination number. This difference may originate from the competitive effect between the solvent and anions. The involvement of anions in the calculation may be more approximate to the real solvation environment. On account of the lowest solvation energy of [Na–PF6–DEGDME]+, this configuration may be the main species in the solvation environment. The strong solvation ability of ethers can also be responsible for the co-intercalation behavior in graphite.
 Fig. 16  Stable Na+–ether complexes. (a) Solvation energies of possible solvation structures in different electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (b) Solvation energy of solvents and PF6− with Na+ in DEGDME-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Total energy of Na+ bonded with PC, DMC, and TEGDME solvents. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. Calculated electron affinity energy of (d) different solvents, Na+, PF6− and NaPF6 and (e) Na+–DEGDME complexes with and without PF6−. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. 
Besides the solvation energy, some works calculated the bond energy between sodium ions and different solvents. Consequently, an ether solvent (TEGDME) was verified to absorb sodium ions with the lowest energy (0.633 eV), while carbonate-based electrolytes (PC and DMC) displayed higher values of 1.26 and 1.37 eV, respectively. Therefore, it is easy for ether solvent to bind with sodium ions, forming stable solvated complexes, where the Na ion is stable at the top of the oxygen position (Fig. 16c).212
A higher electron affinity energy was reported as further proof of the reductive stability of Na–ether complexes.213 The electron affinity energy of DEGDME, EC, DMC and ions was calculated, where DEGDME solvent showed the highest value, demonstrating its extremely high reduction stability (Fig. 16d and e). Similar calculations were also carried out for the solvents in the solvation shells and optimized solvation structures. The Na-DEGDME solvation configurations without PF6− were more stable than that of EC and DMC, according to the higher value of electron affinity energy. After reduction, it is sodium rather than the ether solvent that preferred to absorb the extracted electrons, according to the charge distribution analysis. This further demonstrated the extreme reductive stability of ethers. In comparison, after receiving one electron, the carbonate solvent in the solvation shells underwent reduction and distortion, corresponding to weak solvation ability and poorer reduction stability.
In addition to the energy considerations, the reduction stability of solvated complexes should be also considered. The electrochemical reduction is related to the electronic states of the solvent and solvated cations against the applied potential, that is, the LUMO energies. The HOMO energy is less important in this situation given that it is difficult for the electropositive solvated cations to donate electrons at the given potential. Generally, a lower LUMO energy level of a specific solvation configuration indicates the preferential reduction and the poorer electrochemical stability of the electrolyte. As described in Section 3.1.2, linear ether solvents present higher LUMO values than conventional carbonate solvents.27,105,159,211 The solvated complexes of ether solvents such as [Na–DEGDME]+ and [NaPF6–DEGDME] also delivered higher LUMO values than their carbonate counterpart. Therefore, ether solvents are believed to be more stable in electrochemical reactions than carbonate solvents.
Consequently, the specific solvation structure, strong solvation ability and weak electron-accepting capacity of ether solvents all contribute to the highly stable Na–ether complexes, preventing the electrolyte decomposition, and thus promoting the ICE.


5.1.2 Thin SEI. 
Generally, slight electrolyte decomposition implies the generation of a thin ether-derived SEI and high ICE. Given that the SEI may be influenced by the surface state of electrodes,214 the morphology, composition and distribution of the ultra-thin SEI on the surface of distinct electrodes have been described in detail. A thin and ionic conductive SEI is also beneficial to enhance the rate capability due to the short diffusion length for sodium ions. This will be discussed in the next chapter. Here, we mainly focus on the effect of the thickness and morphology of ether-derived SEI on the ICE.
Hard carbon is regarded as one of the most promising anodes in SIBs due to its high reversible capacity and low cost. However, its practical application may be hindered by its relatively low ICE considering the requirements of high Coulombic efficiency and energy density. Generally, the internal porous structure and abundant functional groups in hard carbon inevitably result in large irreversible sodium consumption. It is worth noting that the involvement of ether electrolyte can significantly improve the ICE of hard carbon despite the large specific surface area of electrode. Zhang et al.24 reported a great improvement in ICE in high specific surface area carbon (HSSAC) anodes in ether-based electrolytes, wherein rGO had a surprisingly high ICE of up to 74.6% in ether (DEGDME) electrolyte, while 39% in EC/DEC (Fig. 17a). The anode in ether electrolyte also delivered a reversible specific capacity of 509 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles. The authors attributed the superb performance to a thin, stable, dense and homogeneous ether-derived SEI. The hard carbon derived from loofah sponge was also found to exhibit an improved ICE (63% in DEGDME while 41% in EC/DEC electrolyte) and excellent rate performance (143 mA h g−1 plateau capacity in DEGDME at 3C rate while 16 mA h g−1 in EC/DEC) (Fig. 17b). The formation of a thin SEI is the reason for the enhanced ICE and stable cycling.25 A study found that a hard carbon electrode displayed a higher ICE and capacity in ether-based electrolytes, but more stable cycling (higher capacity retention rate) in carbonate-based electrolytes. Thus, they proposed a method of pre-engineering a “foreign SEI” to combine the stable cycling performance in carbonate electrolytes with the excellent rate performance in ether electrolytes. It was obtained by pre-forming a protective SEI in ester electrolytes, and then circulating in the ether electrolyte. This strategy gave rise to great cycle stability and rate performance for hard carbon simultaneously (over 1000 cycles barely any capacity decay at a current density of 0.5 A g−1).215 Recently, a study used lithium pretreatment methods together with TEGDME electrolytes to increase the ICE and improve the fast sodium ion storage dynamics of commercial hard carbon materials.199 Lithium-pretreated HC achieved an ultra-high ICE (>92%) and high specific capacity (∼220 mA h g−1) in TEGDME electrolyte, superior to common carbonate electrolyte. In this report, the electrolyte decomposition was simulated. Owing to the strong interaction between Na+ and TEGDME molecules, the TEGDME molecules will not decompose unless an electrified anode is present, implying the generation of a thin SEI, which was also supported by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. Several articles detailed the morphology and composition of SEI films formed on carbon materials in ether and carbonate electrolyte.24,25,215,216 Recently, our group reported the much higher ICE of monodispersed HC nanospheres in ether-based electrolyte than carbonate electrolytes, specifically, 82.36% in ethers and 71.07% in carbonates (Fig. 17c). As shown in Fig. 17d, the much thinner ether-derived SEI layer (∼5 nm) was visualized by cryo-transmission electron microscopy, while the carbonate-derived SEI suggested a thicker SEI of 11 nm. As shown in Fig. 17e, according to the results of time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), the throughout signals of the decomposition species in all the sputtering processes of carbonate-derived SEI also confirmed the much thicker SEI layer. Also, the thin ether-derived SEI was further demonstrated in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) curves according to the shorter displacement. The mechanical property of the SEI was investigated by measuring the Young's modulus.215 The ether-originated SEI showed a more smooth morphology and much higher Young's modulus value than the carbonate-originated SEI, demonstrating the excellent mechanical property of the SEI in ether-based electrolytes. In the case of the composition of the SEI formed in ether and carbonate electrolyte, an agreement has yet to be reached. On the surface of the rGO anode, XPS analysis demonstrated that the SEI formed in ether electrolyte was generally thinner and had a relatively uniform organic/inorganic mixture inside, while the SEI formed in ester electrolyte was thicker, consisting of abundant inorganic substances inside and inhomogeneous composition.24 A similar thinner SEI among hard carbon was also found in ether electrolytes.25,199,215,216 However, considering the higher modulus together with XPS analysis, Xu et al.215 believed that the inorganic ingredient holds a dominant position in ether-derived SEI, while more organic compositions were deemed in ester-derived SEI, which differs from the opinion mentioned before. Nevertheless, it should be noted that a thin SEI film implies little irreversible sodium consumption and will significantly reduce the sodium ion diffusion distance and favor sodium ion transport. The unique morphological and chemical compositional properties of the SEI film formed in ether-based electrolytes may be the reason for the improved ICE of carbon materials.
 Fig. 17  High ICE and thin SEI formed in ether-based electrolytes: performance and characterization. (a) Improved ICE in the ether-based electrolytes of HSSAC anode. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (b) Improved ICE of hard carbon in ether-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (c) Higher ICE of hard carbon anode in ether-based electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. Thin SEI demonstrated by (d) HAADF and HRTEM images of cycled HCNS electrode and (e) AFM force spectroscopy and TOF-SIMS profiles of the formed SEI films in DEGDME-based and EC/DEC-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (f) SEM and HRTEM images of cycled TiO2 electrode. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Metal oxides have been proposed as notable anodes for SIBs due to their intriguing properties of considerable sodium storage capacity, cost-effectiveness and abundant natural resources. Among them, TiO2 anodes are expected to exhibit excellent cycling stability based on their intercalation reactions in SIBs, attracting significant research attention.217,218 The TiO2 anode is beneficial with an average sodium storage voltage of less than 1 V vs. Na+/Na, but suffers from large volume expansion during the sodiation process.219 Thus, nanostructures such as nanorods,208 nanotubes,220 nanospheres221 and composites with carbon materials222 have been designed to improve the sodium insertion capability of TiO2 but they presented a low ICE (only ∼40%) in most instances. However, due to the synergetic effect of ether-based electrolytes and graphene, TiO2/graphene composite was reported to obtain stable cycle performance and high ICE (60%) in DEGDME electrolyte, which exceeded that in carbonate-based electrolytes (41% in EC/DMC).223 In the case of the interfacial property in ether–TiO2 systems, the morphological characteristics of the SEI were studied. The ex situ SEM micrographs of the discharged products in different electrolytes showed a thick polymeric layer covering the TiO2 spheres in EC/DMC electrolyte, while the pristine morphology was well reserved in DEGDME electrolyte. A similar phenomenon was found in 3D TiO2 hollow spheres.224 The formation of a thin SEI in ether-based electrolytes could retain the original porous structure, ensuring more Na+ diffusion pathways. In contrast, a thick SEI film developed in carbonate-based electrolytes, gravely blocking the perforated channels for Na+ diffusion to the inside of TiO2, which led to a distinct sodium storage performance in the two electrolytes. Similar results have been demonstrated in other reports. The thickness of the SEI on TiO2 in DEGDME electrolyte was ∼2.5 nm after two cycles, which grew slowly to 3.9 nm after 100 cycles. However, the SEI film in EC/DEC electrolyte was as thick as 10 nm, which further increased to 17 nm after 100 cycles, implying the continuous growth of the SEI in carbonate electrolyte (Fig. 17f).27 According to the composition of the SEI films in different electrolytes, the relative proportion of carbon-containing byproducts was responsible for the difference, with Na2CO3 occupying a large proportion in carbonate-based electrolytes, as revealed by the XPS analysis. A similar high ICE and thin SEI layer were also observed in another metal oxide, GeOx, which benefited from the application of ether-based electrolytes. The GeOx anode exhibited a high reversible capacity and ICE (381 mA h g−1, 73%) in DEGDME-based electrolytes, whereas inferior values (309 mA h g−1, 58%) in EC/DEC-based electrolytes. It is believed that the decomposition of the electrolyte was more severe in EC/DEC than in the ether-based solvents, leading to an increase in the surface resistance and overpotential. According to the SEM images of the GeOx cycled in different electrolytes, the amounts of decomposition products formed with EC/DEC electrolytes was much larger than that in ether-based electrolytes, demonstrating the formation of thin ether-derived SEI property.225 In addition, ether-based electrolytes have been also applied in micro-sized SnO226 and exfoliated MoO3 anodes.227 However, the function and superiority of ether-based electrolytes were not discussed and studied. It is worth noting that the beneficial effects of ether-based electrolytes in metal oxides were discovered in limited electrodes. Their application in other oxides have not been reported to date, and thus more research is needed in this area.
The beneficial effect of ether-based electrolyte on Coulombic efficiency has also been discovered in metal phosphides. Sn4P3 material is a potential anode for SIBs due to its high gravimetric and volumetric capacity. However, it suffers from low coulombic efficiency and large volume expansion, which lead to rapid capacity decay.228 It has been reported that Sn4P3@C spheres exhibited a high ICE of 90% in DME-based electrolyte, which exceeded that in EC/DMC (72.7%) and EC/DMC + 10%FEC (59.8%) electrolytes. This high ICE is believed to be attributed to the thin and spatially confined SEI formed in ether-based electrolytes, which was verified by SEM, TEM and XPS analysis.229 Moreover, an ether-based electrolyte could provide a stable and favorable SEI, thus facilitating the sodium storage process in Sn4P3/NHC composite electrodes.230 The ether-derived SEI was more distributed, forming a continuous film covering the particles. In contrast, the surface morphology was much more inhomogeneous for the electrode cycled in carbonate-based electrolyte. Additionally, the organic-rich ether-derived SEI indicates structural flexibility to buffer the volume change during cycling, thus resulting in stable sodium storage. In the case of the CuP2 electrode, it exhibited a higher ICE in ether-based electrolyte (83%) than the conventional carbonate-based electrolyte (59%).231 However, a further discussion on the effect of these two types of electrolytes is lacking.
A high ICE in ether electrolyte was also widely demonstrated in metal sulfides and selenides. Many works have reported a high ICE exceeding 85% when using ether-based electrolyte, which generally surpassed that in carbonate-based systems. As mentioned, as early as 2009, an attempt to use the commercial Cu2S was reported, which demonstrated a poor electrochemical performance in TEGDME electrolytes. Nevertheless, the Cu2S anode showed an extremely high ICE (91%) in TEGDME electrolyte.232 This is consistent with the recently reported high ICE of cooper sulfides in ether electrolytes.21,233,234 The Co9S8/Co anode also delivered an ultra-high ICE of 91% in an ether-based electrolyte (1.0 M NaCF3SO3 in TEGDME), which may be attributed to the prevention of SEI generation, given that the side reactions between the electrode and electrolyte were suppressed in ether-based electrolytes. Also, FTIR and TEM demonstrated the absence of a solid electrolyte interphase film.235 Other cobalt sulfides like CoS2 and CoSx also demonstrated high ICE (>90%) in ether electrolytes.29,236,237 Despite the large electro-active surface areas of SnS nanoparticle/MWCNT composites, the ICE was about 90.0%.238 In the case of the ZnS anode, the battery showed the highest ICE in EC/TEGDME (90% in EC/TEGDME, 45.9% in EC/PC, 41.7% in EC/DMC).200 Moreover, a high ICE exceeding 90% by various selenides in ether electrolytes was reported in FeSe2 (93.1%),239 CoSe2 (92.5%),240 ZnSe (94.3%),241 NiSe2 (>90%),242,243 CuSe (91%)244 and Bi2Se3 (94.8%),245 which significantly exceeded that in the conventional carbonate-based electrolyte. This high ICE is related to the special SEI properties. However, most of the works mainly focused on the benefits of the advanced structure and less on the electrolyte and interfaces. Recently, the ether-derived SEI properties on the surface of CoSe2 were investigated in detail. The morphology and component of the SEI in different electrolyte formulas (NaPF6–DEGDME, NaClO4–DEGDME and NaPF6–EC/DEC) were illustrated by HRTEM and XPS analysis. The SEI formed in NaPF6–DEGDME delivered an ultrathin thickness of 2–10 nm, while the improved thickness of 5–20 nm in NaPF6–EC/DEC and 9–50 nm in NaClO4–DEGDME electrolytes. Also, the inorganic-rich component of the SEI in NaPF6–DEGDME is more available for ion diffusion than the organic-rich SEI in NaPF6–EC/DEC and NaClO4–DEGDME electrolytes, owing to the fact that a high content of organic species will impede the charge diffusion and reduce the electrochemical activity.

5.2 Stable cycle performance
The reversible capacity and cycling performance are the key performance indicators of battery devices. The charge/discharge capacity is generally determined by the electrochemical reaction of electrodes and the microstructures of electrodes including their morphology, pore structure, and defect sites. In addition, the cycling stability is highly dependent on the reversible electrochemical reaction, integrated electrode structure and stable SEI formation. Specifically, an irreversible reaction causes the continuous generation of inactive materials and the loss of charge/discharge capacity. The rupture of the electrode structure will lead to the loss of electric contact in the active material and the exposure of newly generated active surface, which will induce further electrolyte decomposition. The formation of an unstable and thick SEI results in the successive loss of limited charge carriers, and finally short cycle life.
Compared with the standard carbonate-based electrolyte (EC/DEC), ether-based electrolytes have found to effectively stabilize the cycling performance of various types of electrodes including carbon materials, alloying anodes and metal chalcogenides. The origin of the superior cycling performance can be attributed to the highly reversible reaction, stable structural evolution of electrodes and the formation of a robust SEI in ether-based electrolytes.

5.2.1 Highly reversible reaction. 
5.2.1.1 Inhibiting side reactions. 
Metal chalcogenides are typical conversion anodes in secondary batteries. Compared with the intercalation reaction, conversion reactions can provide a higher reversible capacity.246,247 For example, molybdenum sulfide was successfully applied in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, delivering a high specific capacity of up to 1000 mA h g−1 and capacitance values of up to 700 F cm−3, respectively.248,249 In sodium-ion batteries, various metal chalcogenides have been investigated such as molybdenum sulfide (MoS2), cobalt sulfide (CoS2 and Co9S8), iron sulfide (FeS2), copper sulfide (CuS), and tin sulfide (SnS2).250 Although the conversion-type sodium storage mechanism confers a high theoretical specific capacity, the nucleophilic addition reaction between soluble intermediate products such as polysulfides (Sn2−) and polyselenides (Sen2−) with conventional carbonate-based electrolytes will result in poor reaction reversibility. Taking EC as an example, as a nucleophile, the electronegative Sn2− will attack the electropositive C atoms in the carbonyl group and bond with them (Fig. 18a). Besides the carbonyl group, it is predictable that other compounds with unsaturated bonds may react with Sn2− and Sen2−. By comparison, ether-based electrolytes with saturated bonds are difficult to react with them. Studies have calculated the energy barrier of the possible reactions between Sen2− and carbonate- and ether-based electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 18b. Based on the calculation results, Sen2− tends to spontaneously react with carbonate-based electrolytes such as EC and DEC and fails to react with ether-based electrolytes due to their positive free energy. These results were also demonstrated experimentally.
 Fig. 18  Stable cycle performance benefiting from the high chemical stability of ether solvents: performance and mechanism. (a) Reaction formula of EC, PC, DEC, and DMC with polysulfides. Reproduced from ref. 283 with Permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (b) Reaction formula and free energy of ether- and carbonate-based electrolytes with polyselenides. Reproduced from ref. 284 with Permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (c) Optimized adsorption structure and binding energy of Na2Se with PC and DEGDME solvent. Reproduced from ref. 272 with Permission from Springer, Copyright 2021. Stable cycling life: (d) FeS2, reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (e) FeSe2, reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. (f) CoS2, reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
FeS2, a layered compound with a theoretical specific capacity of 894 mA h g−1, is considered a feasible anode in sodium-ion batteries, benefiting from its low cost and environmental friendliness.251 In 2015, Chen et al.16 compared the electrochemical performance of FeS2 microspheres in different electrolyte species including solvents (DEGDME, EC/DEC and PC) and sodium salts (NaCF3SO3 and NaClO4). The battery consisting of carbonate-based electrolytes (EC/DEC and PC) exhibited normal charge–discharge curves in the first cycle with a capacity of 210 mA h g−1. However, both of them delivered a rapid capacity decay to 45 and 90 mA h g−1 in 60 cycles, respectively. On the contrary, the ether-based electrolyte enabled the FeS2 battery to exhibit a highly stable cycle performance, without capacity decay in 60 cycles. Also, the type of sodium salts did not have an obvious effect on the cycle performance. These results are consistent with previous studies, where ether-based electrolytes showed higher stability toward active polysulfides. Besides, the authors also attributed the success of the ether-based electrolyte to the reaction energy barrier. It is believed that the flexible chain morphology of the DEGDME solvent endows a smaller energy barrier for intercalation, and thus exhibits more rapid reaction kinetics than the carbonate-based electrolyte with large volume variation. Around the same time, another report discovered the decisive effect of the electrolyte on the cycle performance of FeS2.252 They simply substituted a carbonate-based electrolyte with an ether-based electrolyte (1.0 M NaCF3SO3 in DEGDME), which effectively improved the cycle stability of the FeS2 anode. However, the exact mechanism of the ether-based electrolyte enhancing the cycle stability was not reported. In the case of FeSe2, it was proven that the ether electrolyte is a better choice for the FeSe2/Na battery rather than EC/DEC- and PC-based electrolyte, providing stable cycle capacity and high Coulombic efficiency (Fig. 18d). In 2015, Zhang et al.15 first reported FeSe2 microspheres as an advanced sodium-ion battery anode, using 1.0 M NaCF3SO3 in DEGDME as the electrolyte (Fig. 18e). The FeSe2 microsphere anode assembled by nanooctahedra showed a high discharge capacity (447 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1), excellent rate performance (226 mA h g−1 at 25 A g−1), and long cycling stability (372 mA h g−1 after 2000 cycles at 1 A g−1). The solvent-dependent phenomenon was further demonstrated in other works. FeSe2 clusters composed of nanorods were synthesized, and then tested in ether electrolyte (NaCF3SO3 in DEGDME) and carbonate-based electrolytes (NaClO4 in EC/DMC, EC/DMC-5%FEC).253 In the two carbonate electrolytes, the as-prepared FeSe2 clusters suffered from rapid capacity decay. In contrast, in the ether-based electrolyte, the anode exhibited a high discharge capacity (515 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) and long cycle life of 400 cycles without obvious capacity loss. Considering the structural instability of sulfides and selenides induced by large the volume change during the charge/discharge process, some works have combined electrolyte optimization with structural design strategies, such as nanoengineering, compositing methods and binary selenides synthesis, to further enhance their sodium storage performance. Ultrasmall iron selenide (FeSe2) nanoparticles,254 rod-like FeSe2 coated with nitrogen-doped carbon,255 FeSe2 nanorod/graphene anodes,239 cellular carbon-wrapped FeSe2 nanocavities,256 ultrafine FeSe nanoparticles (∼5 nm) embedded in 3D carbon nanofiber aerogel257 and hierarchical porous spheres of iron cobalt binary-metal selenide (Fe2CoSe4) anodes were proven to exhibit excellent cycle stability in DEGDME-based electrolyte. Notably, other linear ether solvents were also found to stabilize the intermediate anion groups such as Sn2− and Sen2−. Wan et al.258 for the first time demonstrated the suitability of Fe7Se8 as an anode for sodium-ion batteries using NaCF3SO3 in TEGDME electrolyte. Fe7Se8 nanoparticles (∼100 nm) encapsulated by nitrogen-doped carbon (Fe7Se8@NC) provided a reversible capacity of 339 mA h g−1 and maintained 99.5% capacity retention rate in 1000 cycles. Besides, in DME electrolyte, uniform peapod-like Fe7Se8@C nanorods synthesized via the metal-organic framework (MOF) method also showed high capacity and stable cycling.259
Similar trends were proven in cobalt sulfide (CoSx) anodes. CoSx possesses considerable electronic conductivity and similar thermal stability with iron sulfides, and thus expected to be promising anodes in sodium-ion batteries.260 Similarly, in 2015, Fu et al.29 first studied the sodium storage performance of both CoS2 and CoS2/multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) electrodes in both ether-based (1.0 M NaCF3SO3 in DEGDME) and carbonate-based (1.0 M NaClO4 in EC/PC) electrolytes (Fig. 18f). Consequently, in EC/PC electrolyte, the CoS2/MWCNT electrodes displayed a capacity retention ratio of 50% after 100 cycles, while in the case of DEGDME electrolyte, the capacity retention ratio was up to 69% under the same conditions and better rate properties were also detected. The improved performance is attributed to the suppression of side reactions between the soluble intermediates and electrolyte in ether-based electrolytes. Besides CoS2, other cobalt sulfide-based materials such as CoS,260 Co4S3,261 and Co9S8235 have also exhibited a stable cycle performance in ether-based electrolyte compared to the standard carbonate-based electrolyte.237,262–265 With regard to cobalt selenides, Zhang et al.266 pioneered the study on CoSe2 anodes and ether-based electrolytes for SIBs. Compared with the poor performance in carbonate solvents, the urchin-like CoSe2 assembled by nanorods achieved an excellent Na storage performance, retaining a high specific capacity of 410 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 over 1800 cycles in DEGDME electrolytes. Subsequently, hollow polyhedral hybrids structured from CNT-bridged carbon-coated CoSe2 nanospheres (CoSe2@C/CNTs),267 cobblestone-like CoSe2@C nanospheres,268 nano-sized cobalt selenide (Co0.85Se) particles embedded in carbon spheres (CoSe@CSs),269 hollow microflower-shaped CoSe2 anodes240 and Se/CoSe2/C anode270,271 were reported to deliver a superior performance in ether-based electrolyte. Recently, Jiang et al.272 investigated the variation in the performance of CoSe2@CNT-MXene anodes in different electrolytes through theoretical calculation. In this work, the shuttling constraint mechanism of Sen2− in ether and carbonate electrolytes was presented. According to the optimized geometries of the PC/Na2Se and DEGDME/Na2Se systems, the binding energy of PC with Na2Se is larger than that of DEGDME with Na2Se (0.69 eV vs. 0.6 eV), implying the possible reaction between PC and polyselenides (Fig. 18c). Experimentally, benefiting from the weak interaction between the electrolyte and electrode interface, the CoSe2@CNT-MXene anode showed a much better cycle performance in DEGDME than in PC electrolyte.
For CuSx anodes, as early as 2009, commercial Cu2S refined by ball milling was studied in ether-based electrolytes (TEGDME). However, due to the degradation of the electrode structure, the as-prepared Cu2S electrode exhibited a relatively low capacity and poor cycle performance. Also, its first discharge capacity was 294 mA h g−1, which decreased to 220 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles at 50 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.4–2.6 V.232 Recently, CuS/rGO composites showed remarkable sodium-ion storage performances in ether electrolytes (1.0 M NaCF3SO3 in TEGDME) compared with carbonate-based electrolyte (1.0 M NaClO4 in EC/PC + 5%FEC). A long cycle life of 450 cycles, while maintaining 345 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 was obtained. On the contrary, owing to the side reaction with polysulfides, the anode in EC/PC electrolyte delivered a rapid capacity decay in 20 cycles.21 Copper selenides, which are rarely reported as anodes of SIBs, also demonstrated a superior sodium storage performance in ether-based electrolytes than in the conventional carbonate-based electrolytes. Mesoporous Cu2−xSe nanocrystals showed a capacity of 263.5 mA h g−1 in DEGDME, while only a capacity of 17.0 mA h g−1 in PC after 50 cycles at 1 A g−1.273 It was believed that the DEGDME electrolyte was beneficial to effectively inhibit the side reactions and diminish the consumption of active species, thus improving the electrochemical performance. Cu2–xSe nanorods and CuSe with a crystal-pillar-like morphology were demonstrated to exhibit desirable sodium storage properties in the electrolyte of TEGDME and DEGDME.244,274
Recently, dandelion-shaped manganese sulfide (MnS) was reported to exhibit an enhanced performance in ether-based electrolytes for sodium-ion batteries.30 At a current density of 5.0 A g−1, the capacity of 340 mA h g−1 was maintained for more than 1000 cycles. Furthermore, the discharge capacities of 277 and 230 mA h g−1 were obtained at 10 and 20 A g−1, respectively. The unique structure of the electrode material was advantageous for increasing the active surface area and promoting the mechanical stability. Besides, the selection of the DEGDME-based electrolyte facilitated the formation of a protective SEI film on the electrode surface, limiting the dissolution of polysulfides and the loss of active materials. By comparing the morphology of the separator after cycling in different electrolyte systems (DEGDME and EC/DMC), it was observed that the separator in the ether-based electrolyte hardly changed, while that in EC/DMC electrolyte was slightly eroded with discrete dendritic particles. Therefore, the selection of a suitable electrolyte may avoid sodium dendrite formation and more polysulfide dissolution, maintaining a stable performance in the MnS/Na battery.
In addition to the above-mentioned metal chalcogenides, NiS2,275 ZnSe,276 MnSe2,277 Bi2Se3,245 Sb2Se3278 and SnSSe279 were reported to exhibit a significantly improved cycle life in ether-based electrolyte, while suffering from severe capacity attenuation in carbonate-based electrolytes such as PC and EC/DMC. Notably, despite the detrimental side reactions between carbonate solvents and reduced selenium species, it was demonstrated that the addition of additives such as FEC could effectively benefit the formation of a protective SEI film and avoid the loss of active species. Carbonate solvent combined with FEC additives has been adopted in many studies and exhibited considerable cycle stability.280–282 However, the expensive additives would reduce the reversible capacity compared with ether-based electrolytes.230
5.2.1.2 Unique sodium storage behavior. 
Besides their chemical stability toward the active intermediates, the highly stable cycle performance of metal chalcogenides in ether-based electrolyte is related to their unique sodium storage behavior including distinct voltage platform in charge–discharge curves, varying sodiation depth and the possible reaction between the current collector (Cu) and chalcogenides.
As reported, a dandelion-shaped MnS electrode delivered unique electrochemical curves in ether electrolyte, which significantly differed from that in the common carbonate-based electrolyte in SIBs.30,285 Specifically, a unique platform charge capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 at 2.0 V was observed in ether electrolyte, showing a significant shoulder feature at 2 V compared to that observed in carbonate-based electrolyte. The distinct platform feature was classified as rapid kinetics of pristine MnS reformation and conversion reaction in ether electrolytes. Correspondingly, MnS delivered a higher capacity and reversibility in ether electrolytes. It is worth noting that more studies are required to further ascertain these conclusions.
Special Na storage behavior was also observed in SnS- and ZnS-based anodes. Choi et al.238 reported a paper-type nanohybrid anode (PNA) based on SnS nanoparticles and acid-treated multiwalled carbon nanotubes as an SIB anode. Using 1.0 M NaPF6 in DEGDME as the electrolyte, the PNA anode delivered a high reversible capacity of ≈1200 mA h g−1 and high rate capabilities at a current density of 1 A g−1 and good cycling performance over 250 cycles. Similarly, the SnS-based electrode exhibited a unique potential platform in ether electrolyte. There was a large voltage plateau, corresponding to a capacity of ≈550 mA h g−1 in the low-voltage region of ≈0.1 V versus Na+/Na, which was not observed in the ester-based electrolyte (Fig. 19a and b). It was believed that the low-voltage plateau originated from the reversible formation of Na15Sn4 in the Sn–Na alloying reactions together with the conversion reaction between S with Na ions. To further investigate the significant variation in the electrochemical curves in different electrolytes, in situ EIS measurements were conducted. Notably, a larger resistance of the SEI (RSEI), charge transfer (Rct) and polarization were observed in the carbonate-based electrolyte, inevitably leading to a large overpotential and an early voltage cutoff before reaching the Na alloying reaction voltage. Thus, in conclusion, the electrolyte notably influences the SEI properties, and consequently triggers distinct electrochemical performances in electrodes.
 Fig. 19  Unique sodium storage behavior. Distinct voltage platform of SnS electrode in (a) DEGDME-based and (b) EC/DEC-based electrolytes. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. Variation in the sodiation depth of TiO2 electrode in (c) DEGDME-based and (d) EC/DEC-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature, Copyright 2019. (e) First two cycle discharge capacities and (f) CV curves of organic Na2TP/G electrode in DEGDME-based and EC/DEC-based electrolytes demonstrate the one-step sodiation in ether-based electrolytes, while two-step sodiation in carbonate-based electrolytes. (g) One-step sodiation is related to the structural change in diglyme-based electrolyte, as proven by electrolyte-shuffling experiment. (e–g) reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. 
In the case of ZnS-based anodes, Su et al.212 first reported ZnS nanospheres as anode with EC/TEGDME electrolyte, which provided a capacity of over 1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 20 mA g−1 and maintained 774 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Compared with the charge/discharge curves of ZnS in EC/PC, EC/DMC and EC/TEGDME electrolytes, the EC/TEGDME electrolyte contributed to a much longer potential platform at ∼0.3 V and higher overall discharge capacity. The constant-voltage plateau was related to the solid–solution region, where Na-ion inserted into ZnS and formed sodium–ZnS phases. The longer plateau can be attributed to the diffusion of more charges in the EC/TEGDME electrolyte. ZnS in ether-based electrolyte presented a higher diffusion capacity (≈55% of the overall capacity) than carbonate electrolyte (≈45% for EC/DMC, ≈43% for EC/PC) according to the differential capacity versus voltage profiles. The diffusion barrier of Na+ in ZnS in different electrolytes was described by DFT calculation. The Na+ diffusion showed the lowest energy barrier in TEGDME (1.33 eV), while the energy was 1.26 and 1.37 eV in PC and DMC, respectively, demonstrating the feasibility of Na-ion transport in the TEGDME electrolyte and the correspondingly high diffusion capacity.
Similarly, an ether-based electrolyte was demonstrated to contribute to higher capacity and stable cycling in a titanium dioxide (TiO2) anode because of the deeper sodiation depth. TiO2 is considered a promising anode for lithium, sodium, and aluminum ion batteries due its high energy storage capacity, abundant resources, and low cost.217,218 In the case of anatase titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanocrystals, a high specific capacity and stable cycling performance were demonstrated in ether-based electrolytes, while poor performance and rapid capacity decline in EC/DEC electrolyte.27 Besides, the polarization was maintained at a low value in DEGDME electrolyte with an increase in the scan rate, while it became more severe in EC/DEC electrolyte, indicating the favorable kinetics in ether-based electrolytes.106 The sodiation of pristine TiO2 leads to the formation of metallic titanium, sodium oxide, and amorphous sodium titanate, resulting in the disappearance of the Raman peaks of crystalline TiO2. To disclose the reasons for the outstanding performance of TiO2 electrodes in ether-based electrolytes, in situ Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the structural evolution of TiO2 in different electrolytes during the charge/discharge process.106 Consequently, in ether-based electrolytes, this anode was fully sodiated during the initial discharge according to the disappearance the Raman peaks. On the contrary, the peaks of crystalline TiO2 were still observed in EC/DEC electrolyte after the first discharge, implying an incomplete sodiation process. The complete sodiation process in ether-based electrolytes guaranteed a high specific capacity (Fig. 19c and d). Besides, carbon materials such as rGO and CMK-3 were also reported to be sodiated to a higher extent in ether-based electrolyte.24
Recently, an organic electrode with highly solubility and irreversibility was reported to exhibit a preferable cycle performance in ether-based electrolyte.286,287 Yang et al.287 developed a self-assembled graphene/disodium terephthalate (Na2TP) electrode with exceptionally high loadings and achieved a high reversible capacity of 245 mA h g−1 in an ether-based electrolyte. The ether-based electrolyte was initially adopted to inhibit parasitic reactions. However, further experimental results disclosed the distinct sodium storage behavior in ether- and carbonate-based electrolytes (Fig. 19e–g). As is known, one Na2TP material stores two sodium ions at two storage sites through a two-step process.288 Cyclic voltammetry (CV) results suggested that Na2TP showed two split cathodic and anodic peaks in EC/DEC electrolyte, indicating a sluggish two-step sodiation process. In contrast, in ether-based electrolyte, only one merged peak was observed, implying the fast electron and ion diffusion.289 To determine the origin of the merged peaks, electrolyte shuffling methods were adopted to investigate whether the distinct sodiation behavior was induced by the SEI in different electrolytes. The Na2TP electrode was tested in EC/DEC to form a carbonate-derived SEI, and then in fresh DEGDME, and lastly re-assembled in EC/DEC electrolyte. It was found that after the two-step process in EC/DEC, the electrode showed one merged peak in DEGDME electrolyte and this peak remained when the electrolyte changed back to EC/DEC electrolyte. This means that the one-step process in DEGDME electrolyte is not related to the SEI structure but the electrode structural change in ether-based electrolyte. It was believed that the one-step sodium storage process was enabled by nanosizing-effect or co-solvation mechanisms.287 However, more efforts are required to verify this perspective.
It should be noted that the unique sodium storage behavior in ether-based electrolyte mentioned above is mainly focused on the influence of the electrolyte on the extent of sodiation and the rate of ion transportation/diffusion but not the specific reaction mechanism. Recently, some interesting works disclosed the origin of the highly stable performance of metal sulfides and selenides in ether-based electrolytes.211,290 It was proposed that copper in the current collector gradually replaces the transition metal elements in TMC during cycling and the generated copper sulfide is the actual active material to react with sodium ions.290 In this work, various transition metal chalcogenides were found to feature similar electrochemical profiles after several cycles, which were totally different from the initial cycle. The change in the potential plateau was believed to be induced by the variation in the redox couple. The cross-sectional view EDS mapping revealed that the Cu in the current collector diffused throughout the active material after 100 cycles. Also, the gradual disappearance of the Cu peaks during cycling in the in situ XRD results revealed the generation of replaced copper sulfide. The generated cooper sulfides were important for the stable cycle performance given that the replacement of the Ti collector led to rapid capacity decay in different sulfide electrodes. The Cu-driven conversion mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 20a and b. This process was believed to be drastic in the first few cycles and almost completed after 20 cycles. Recently, Xu et al.291 also found that the redox couples in the CV profiles of different metal selenides (CoSex, FeSex, NiSe2, Sb2Se3, ZnSe, etc.) after 500 cycles were similar with that of CuSex, as shown in Fig. 20c and d. The authors firstly investigated the Cu-driving conversion mechanism through the hard–soft–acid–base (HSAB) theory. Generally, hard acids and bases are highly charged and less polarizable and opposite to soft acids and bases.275 The hardness of the acids/bases are summarized in the plot of |Z|/r vs. X (charge/diameter vs. element electronegativity), where Co2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Zn2+ and Sb3+ are harder than Cu2+. Due to the preferential bond between soft acids and soft bases, metal selenides, which consist of hard or border acids (metal cations) and typical soft base (Se2− anions), are hard to resist the challenge of Cu2+. Hence, the soft acid would gradually convert to generate CuSex species. To confirm this explanation, Ag2Se with the soft acid Ag+ was adopted as an anode. The redox reaction in the CV profiles of Ag2Se remained unchanged after 300 cycles and were quite different from that of CuSex. The EDS results also demonstrated the inhibition of Ag2Se to Cu permeation, confirming the effectiveness of the HSAB theory. Furthermore, the ultrathin SEI film formed in the NaPF6/DEGDME electrolyte was demonstrated to be beneficial for the permeation of Cu2+ and stable cycle performance compared with NaPF6 in EC/DEC and NaClO4 in DEGDME electrolytes. Thus, these works provide a new understanding of the unique role of ether-based electrolytes in the sodium storage mechanism.
 Fig. 20  Cu-Driven electrochemical mechanism of metal sulfides and selenides in ether-based electrolytes. Schematic of (a) Cu-driven conversion mechanism for transition metal chalcogenides and (b) structure of the working electrode during cycling process. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (c) Electrochemical transition from metal selenides to Cu2−xSe according to the electrochemical properties in the 5th and 500th cycles, and the hard–soft–acid–base (HSAB) theory proposed to explain the transition. (d) Schematic of electrochemically induced transition from MnS to Cu2−xS. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. 


5.2.2 Stable electrode structure. 
Ether-based electrolytes have been demonstrated to effectively stabilize the electrode structure especially in alloying anodes and metal sulfides anodes due to the induction of porous and nano-sized morphology evolution.
Alloying anodes with high capacity are promising for practical use in sodium-ion batteries. Sodium-rich alloying compounds are formed during the sodiation process, providing a high specific capacity. The sodiation-available metals are mainly in groups IVA and VA, such as bismuth (Bi), tin (Sn), antimony (Sb), and lead (Pb). However, their large volume expansion during cycling causes particle pulverization, failure of the electrical contact between the active material and the current collector, and finally poor cycle performance and rate performance.292–294 Most of the current research has focused on the design of nanostructures of metallic materials and composites with carbon materials to alleviate the volume changes during the charge/discharge process and improve the structural stability.295,296 Recently, it was demonstrated that electrolyte optimization can play an active role in promoting the structural stability and electrochemical performance of metallic materials.
The bismuth electrode has a theoretical specific capacity of 385 mA h g−1, corresponding to a volume expansion ratio of 250% in the process of sodium storage, which is generally believed to be the two-step alloying reaction of Bi → NaBi → Na3Bi.297 In 2015, Wang et al.152 first discovered the high capacity of Bi@graphene in sodium-ion batteries (561 mA h g−1 at 0.04 A g−1) with carbonate-based electrolytes. Unfortunately, this anode experienced rapid capacity decay in 50 cycles. Owing to the drastic structural collapse in the repeated cycles, bulk alloying-type materials usually display poor performance.
However, recently, untreated micron-sized bismuth particles were found to have superior cycle stability in ether electrolytes (specific capacity up to 400 mA h g−1 at 0.4 A g−1 and capacity retention ratio of 94.4% after 2000 cycles).17 It is interesting that in an ether-based electrolyte (DEGDME), the original bulk Bi gradually evolved into a completely porous structure and maintained stability in 2000 cycles. In contrast, in the carbonate-based electrolyte (PC), bulk Bi underwent a huge volume expansion and structural collapse within several cycles (Fig. 21a). The special porous morphology may be ascribed to the penetration of the Na+–DEGDME compound in the void space of the bulk Bi to minimize the surface energy produced by the expansion and contraction of Bi upon Na insertion and extraction, as illustrated in Fig. 21b. The stable porous structure significantly favored the fast sodiation kinetics by promoting the contact between the electrode and electrolyte. It is worth noting that the stable and thin solid electrolyte interface (∼5 nm) and good electrode wettability in ether-based electrolytes also helped the great properties. Considering the positive effect of ether-based electrolytes on Bi anodes, scientists have been devoted to combining ether-based electrolytes with other structural modification design strategies to further enhance their cycle performance. The design of Bi nanoparticles embedded in a carbon framework combined with ether-based electrolytes has been investigated. The Bi nanoparticle@carbon composite developed by Xu et al.298 displayed an ultra-long cycle life of 30000 cycles at 8 A g−1 and demonstrated a high reversible capacity of 280 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles even at a high mass loading of 11.5 mg cm−2. An analogous structural deformation in the porous morphology was detected, suggesting the strong interaction behavior between ether-based electrolytes with Bi particles. In addition, many works employing Bi nanoparticles in a carbon framework have achieved superb sodium storage performance in ether-based electrolytes such as Bi nanoparticles encapsulated in a 3D macroporous graphene framework (Bi@3DGFs),299 multicore–shell Bi@N-doped carbon nanospheres material (Bi@N–C)300 and few-layer bismuthene two-dimensional material.301 The sodium storage in bismuth was carried out by sodium ion insertion, followed by a reversible crystal phase evolution, which resulted in a large anisotropic volume change along the z-axis (142%).301 Severe polarization and structural damage of Bi@N–C were proven in ester electrolytes. Also, an ether electrolyte (DME) with short chain length proved to be effective in stabilizing the electrode structure.300
 Fig. 21  Porous structural evolution: (a) SEM images of structural change in different electrolytes, before and after cycling and (b) corresponding schematic of structural evolution in bulk Bi electrode. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (c) SEM images of porous structure change in ether-based electrolytes and (d) mechanism of structural evolution in bulk Sn electrode. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Tin shows the largest theoretical capacity of 845 mA h g−1 owing to the formation of Na15Sn4. It also suffers the most drastic volume expansion of 420% among the alloying-type anodes. Therefore, although tin electrodes have received wide attention, they face great challenges.302 Methods such as reducing the particle size and compositing tin with carbon materials have been explored, effectively prolonging the cycle life of Sn anodes.303 It is worth noting that the commonly used ester-based electrolyte EC easily decomposes under the catalysis of tin particles.304 Thus, another electrolyte solvent, PC, and FEC additive were employed as feasible candidates in Sn–Na batteries.305–307 Only a few reports have applied ether electrolytes to tin electrodes, but the role of ether electrolytes cannot be ignored. Micron-sized tin was synergistic with ether electrolytes and exhibited excellent performances under adverse particle size conditions. The electrode delivered a capacity as high as 768 mA h g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 after 100 cycles, corresponding to a capacity retention of 88%. The ether electrolyte (DEGDME) allowed the integrity of the electrode to be maintained without the formation of isolated particles and formation of a thin and dense SEI film.104 Recently, a new report also studied the use of ether electrolytes (DME) in micron tin electrodes. A phenomenon similar to that of the above-mentioned bulk Bi electrodes was found, where Sn particles were initially pulverized into a nanometer-sized powder, and then formed a three-dimensional porous coral-like structure with ligaments after cycling. The morphology evolution was realized through repeated cracking, pulverization and sintering, forming a porous structure that could withstand large volume changes, which is the so-called “self-healing” phenomenon (Fig. 21c and d). The self-healing Sn anode possessed ultra-long-term cycle stability with a high capacity of 554 mA h g−1 at a rate of 10C for 5000 cycles.22 Moreover, a porous Sn anode (PSn) prepared via the phase-inversion technique showed a charge capacity of 519 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles together with TEGDME electrolyte.308 Notably, the highly stable performance of the Sn anode largely benefited from the thin and robust SEI layers formed in the ether-based electrolyte, which will be discussed later. Considering the beneficial impact of ether-based electrolytes on the electrochemical property of Sn electrodes, the performance of alloying composites such as Sn–Sb composite in ether-based electrolytes was also carried out.309 It is surprising the pure Sb anode exhibited unexpected and very poor stability in diglyme-based electrolyte, which may be ascribed to the excessive SEI formation and passivation of the electrode. However, the Sn + Sb anode (mixture of Sn and Sb) and SnSb anode both showed a high specific capacity and stable cycling performance in ether-based electrolytes, which may be due to the fact that the electrochemical activity of the Sn–Sb alloying electrode is mainly dominated by the Sn anode.
Lead is a neglected metal anode material not only because of its toxicity but also its low theoretical specific capacity compared to other metals. The Na15Pb4 phase is formed when completely sodiated, providing a theoretical specific capacity of 485 mA h g−1.310 As early as 1987, Jow et al.310 applied ether electrolytes to lead-based anode materials. The Pb-based electrode contained 77 wt% of Na3.75Pb as an active material and delivered a capacity of 218 mA h g−1 over 180 cycles with 1 M NaPF6 in DME electrolyte. Inspired by the uniqueness of ether-based electrolytes, the performance of bare lead anodes was investigated. Also, the impact of different mass loadings was delivered. Exceptionally, the high mass loading (98 wt% of active material) electrode showed a superior specific capacity (∼460 mA h g−1 at 13 mA g−1) together with considerable cycling stability and super high ICE of 95%. Notably, due to the high density of Pb, its volumetric capacity reached 5289 mA h cm−3. This work also proved the compatibility of ether electrolytes in alloying-type electrodes, including reducing the initial irreversible capacity, and inhibition of the decomposition of electrolytes during cycling.311
Additionally, for metal sulfides, nano-sized transition and stable structural evolution were believed to contribute to their highly stable cycle performance. The self-healing structural evolution of the CuS electrode was detected in an ether-based electrolyte system, which is similar to the phenomenon in the micron Sn electrode, as mentioned before. During cycling, the shape of the electrode experienced multi-undulation. Finally, a flat plate with nanometer-sized particles was formed, which was induced by pulverization and agglomeration (Fig. 22a). Meanwhile, the as-prepared electrode delivered a highly stable circulation in 2000 cycles with a capacity retention ratio of up to 99.2% at 5 A g−1. The special structural evolution was considered to guarantee the long cycle life of the CuS anode despite the severe volume change.312 A similar pulverization–tolerance phenomenon was also reported in another CuS anode. Particularly, this anode experienced capacity recovery in the first 100 cycles at 0.2C and a structural evolution from hexagonal plate morphology to small grainy parts (Fig. 22b). It is believed that the pulverization induced by sodium insertion stress enhanced the effective surface area and facilitated the formation of a stable SEI. Thus, the capacity underwent decay and recovery. Notably, bulk CuS also exhibited similar capacity recovery in ether-based electrolytes and displayed considerable electrochemical performance compared with nano CuS.313
 Fig. 22  Stable electrode structure of metal sulfides in ether-based electrolytes. Pulverization–tolerance effect: (a) schematic of structural evolution in CuS electrode. Reproduced from ref. 312 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (b) Schematic showing the mechanism of the pulverization–tolerance effect in copper sulfide anode. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. Stable electrode–electrolyte interaction: (c) structural evolution of ZnS in PC and TEGDME electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (d) Calculated binding energies between the CoS(222) slab model and DEGDME solvent (right) or EC solvent with two orientations (middle and left). Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Besides, ether-based electrolytes are reported to be beneficial to maintain the integrity of pristine metal sulfides. In the case of ZnS, the pristine morphology of the nanosphere shape was maintained well in the fully sodiated and desodiated state in the EC/TEGDME electrolyte, contributing to the stable cycling. In comparison, in the EC/PC electrolyte, the ZnS nanospheres disintegrated into non-compact nanospheres and some fully discharged products were ejected from the nanospheres (Fig. 22c). The frustrated structure in the carbonate-based electrolyte led to a corresponding low Coulombic efficiency and poor cycle performance.212 DFT calculations were conducted to investigate the underlying mechanism of the superior ether-based electrolytes. The structural stability of the active Co4S3 material in DEGDME and EC electrolytes was investigated. Consequently, a lower binding energy (0.31 eV) of the Co–O bond was observed in DEGDME electrolyte, while 1.21 eV in EC electrolyte, implying the superior electrode stability in ether-based electrolytes (Fig. 22d). Also, these 2D holey cobalt sulfide (h-Co4S3) nanosheets were reported to exhibit a great rate and long cycle life (571 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 for over 400 cycles) in DEGDME-based electrolyte.261


5.2.3 Robust SEI. 
An unstable and continuously growing SEI is responsible for the poor cycle performance of electrodes, which withstand large volume changes in the sodiation and desodiation process. Thus, a robust and stable SEI layer is crucial for preserving the morphology and structure of active electrodes.
In graphite, due to the co-intercalation of large solvent molecules, the volume expansion rate is up to 300% when fully discharged (Fig. 23a). Thus, it is surprising that the graphite anode delivers an ultra-stable performance without obvious rapid decay in hundreds of cycles. This superior property is closely related to the reversible co-intercalation behavior, stable layer structure held by van der Waals forces, and more importantly, unique interface structure. However, there is still a debate about whether an SEI exists on the surface of graphite. The SEI is usually formed by the decomposition of the electrolyte in the initial discharge process, and it acts as a passivation layer to maintain the structural stability of the active materials. The SEI is an electronic insulator and ionic conductor, thus enabling the passage of sodium ions. However, whether the SEI hinders the co-intercalation of solvent molecules remains unclear. In a previous report, SEI layers were believed to obstruct the solvent molecules.206 This is contradictory with the reversible co-intercalation reaction of graphite unless the of SEI is missing. The initial capacity loss of graphite demonstrated the electrolyte decomposition, which supports the existence of an SEI. Some reports believed that there may be no SEI film on the graphite surface because the SEI was not directly observed in HRTEM and other tests. OEMS measurements have been applied in the investigation of the SEI formation mechanism in a graphite-lithium battery by qualitatively and quantitatively monitoring the evolution of volatile species during an electrochemical cycle.314,315 Recently, Adelhelm et al.316 first applied the online electrochemical mass spectrometer (OEMS) test to investigate the co-intercalation graphite reactions in SIBs (Fig. 23b). They found that the gas generation originating from electrolyte decomposition was largely limited to the first cycle by OEMS, which is attributed to the nonrecurring reactions with graphite surface groups. Therefore, they believed that the electrolyte decomposed into soluble/volatile not solid products, indicating the absence of the SEI in the co-intercalation reaction. Xing et al.213 also suggested the absence of the SEI on the surface of graphite. The co-intercalation behavior would be hindered by the SEI, which forces solvated ions to desolvate on the electrode surface. Also, a dense and inorganic SEI would become a better “solvent filter” and tend to turn off the solvent diffusion more effectively than a porous and organic SEI. Therefore, they improved the electrolyte concentration from the normal 1 M to 2.5 M to accelerate the generation of an NaF-based SEI (Fig. 23c and d). It turns out that graphite delivered a much poorer performance in 2.5 M ether-based electrolyte. Also, the capacity contribution of co-intercalation behavior largely decreased from 76% (1 M) to 13% (2.5 M), indicating the obstruction of solvent diffusion in the inorganic-dominant SEI. Besides, the SEM and HRTEM analysis also demonstrated the absence of an SEI layer in common 1 M electrolytes and the presence of a thick SEI in 2.5 M electrolyte. It is worth noting that even in the high-concentration electrolyte, co-intercalation was not completely prohibited. Therefore, the ether-derived SEI may not be complete to seal all the graphite edge sites. In contrast, there are other opinions that believe the formation of a very thin SEI occurs on graphite. Recently, our group159 experimentally detected the existence of an ether-derived SEI on graphite through characteristic responses in the AFM analysis and FT-IR spectra (Fig. 23e and f, respectively). The contradiction between the present stable SEI layers and large volume change can be explained by the high Young's modulus of 435.86 MPa, indicating the excellent mechanical property of the ether-based SEI, which is beneficial to withstand large stress and maintain the electrode integrity. A very thin (5.5 nm) and multilayer structure was discovered in an ether-based SEI, where the inner layer mainly consisted of inorganic compounds (Na2CO3 and NaF) and organic species (sodium alkoxide) largely distributed in the outer layer. Furthermore, the organic compounds in the inner layer sparsely bonded the inorganic species, avoiding fracture of SEI upon electrode volume changes during cycling. In comparison, the carbonate-based electrolyte delivered a thick SEI (15 nm) and structure with mixing of inorganic and organic components. Also, the low Young's modulus of 108.5 MPa also indicated the poor mechanical property of the carbonate-derived SEI. Consequently, the highly stable cycle performance and high Coulombic efficiency can be ascribed to the thin and robust SEI, which tolerates the volume change.159
 Fig. 23  Debate of SEI on graphite in ether-based electrolytes. Missing SEI: (a) graphite electrode thickness change during cycling. (b) Selected OEMS mass signals during cycling. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. Electrochemical performance of graphite in (c) 1 M and (d) 2.5 M NaPF6–DEGDME electrolytes. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. Thin and robust SEI on graphite: (e) AFM force spectroscopy results of uncycled graphite electrode, and discharged state of graphite in ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes. (f) FT-IR analysis of discharged state in in ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. 
The SEI properties on the surface of alloying-type anodes were also detected to reveal the origin of the superb cycle performance in ether-based electrolyte. Several works have focused on the SEI on Sn electrodes. Given that the SEI is required to withstand high stress upon volume expansion, it is necessary to determine the mechanical properties of the SEI, which are represented by the deformation resistance. The AFM technique and measurement of the Young's modulus were used to investigate the SEI in different electrolytes.160 As shown in Fig. 24a and b, the EC/DMC-derived SEI showed distinguishable force responses at different stages, while the DEGDME-derived SEI behaved like an elastomer. The stiffness and elasticity of the SEI were verified by measurement of its Young's modulus. The DEGDME-derived SEI delivered stiffer and more elastic characteristics compared with the EC/DMC-derived SEI. Calculations also implied the tolerance of the DEGDME-derived SEI in the fully sodiated state of the electrode. Moreover, the formation mechanism of the DEGDME-derived SEI was also evaluated via the novel differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) approach, which allows the selective monitoring of gas evolution at the electrode/electrolyte interface during cycling.317 The detection of H2 implies the polymerization/oligomerization reaction of the ether solvent during cycling, which is consistent with the elastic property of the SEI. Notably, Sn species may serve as catalysts for ether polymerization/oligomerization. In the case of the composition of SEI films, XPS analysis demonstrated an inorganic compound-rich SEI on an Sn anode (Fig. 24c).317 It is believed that the ether-derived SEI consists of amorphous particles dispersed in a polymer-like matrix and exhibits superior mechanical elasticity, thus maintaining superb stability in the large volume expansion/shrinkage process. Also, the issues in ester-based electrolyte may be attributed to the crystalline-domain-gathered compositions and poor mechanical behaviors of thick SEI layers (Fig. 24d).160
 Fig. 24  Robust SEI on Sn anode. (a) AFM images of SEI formed in EC/DMC-based and DEGDME based electrolytes. (b) Distributions of Young's modulus and relative elastic regions of the SEIs in the two electrolytes. (c) In-depth XPS spectra of C1s, O1s and F1s of SEIs formed in the two electrolytes. (d) Schematic illustrating the compositions, structures and mechanical properties of SEI formed in EC/DMC-based and DEGDME based electrolytes. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 

5.3 High rate capability
A high rate performance is essential to meet the requirements of fast-charging devices. Generally, the rate capability is closely related to the ion/electron transfer rate in the electrode. Considering the atomic scale, the transfer process of Na+ when reaching the electrode can be divided into three steps, as follows: (1) desolvation process of solvated Na+, (2) diffusion across SEI of desolvated Na+ and (3) diffusion of naked Na+ in the interior of the anode. Therefore, the limiting factors of high-rate performance can be concluded as interfacial charge transfer (step 1 and 2) and bulk diffusion (step 3). However, it is difficult to evaluate the rate-determining step of the ion transfer process owing to the influence of distinct cell parameters including cycling parameters, operating temperature, electrode slices and electrolyte species. For example, bulk diffusion may dominate the ion transfer rate in a thick electrode, while the charging rate capability in an ultrathin electrode may be determined by the interfacial charge transfer rate. Due to the fact that the bulk diffusion represents the interaction between charges and electrode materials, the electrode properties such as electronic conductivity and interior atomic structure, and the thickness, may have a crucial impact on the bulk diffusion rate. Also, the interfacial properties are strongly related to the electrolyte species because of the distinct solvation structure, interfacial wettability and SEI formation and composition. It has been demonstrated that the involvement of ether-based electrolyte can significantly enhance the rate capability of sodium-ion cells. This can be attributed to the synergistic effect of the absence of a desolvation process with co-intercalation, ionic conductive SEI layers and favorable bulk diffusion.

5.3.1 Rapid interfacial charge transfer. 
5.3.1.1 Absence of desolvation process in co-intercalation mechanism. 
Fast interfacial kinetics is vital for the rate capability of cells because the multiple phase boundaries at the interface are important paths for ions migration. Owing to the solvation ability of polar solvents in electrolytes, the cations are prone to coordinate with the solvent, forming different solvation configurations. When the solvated cations reach the surface of the electrode, the solvation shells decompose to form a conductive SEI layer and the cations need to desolvate. As shown in Fig. 25a, from the viewpoint of energy, the desolvation process of solvated Na+ may be the most energy consuming process (with the highest energy barrier of 50–70 kJ mol−1) compared with diffusion in the SEI and electrode lattice (20–40 kJ mol−1).318 Therefore, the desolvation process may have a crucial effect on the fast ion diffusion. As shown in Fig. 25b, the charge transfer activation energy of the co-intercalation process in ether electrolytes is much lower than that of the desolvation–intercalation process. Therefore, in ether electrolytes, the special co-intercalation mechanism discovered in some carbon electrodes can deliver a superb rate performance by avoiding the energy-consuming desolvation process.
 Fig. 25  Rapid interfacial charge transfer in ether-based electrolytes. Absence of desolvation: (a) large energy consumption of desolvation process. (b) Charge transfer activation energy of desolvation and co-intercalation process in different electrolytes. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 318 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. Rapid interfacial kinetics: (c) in situ EIS curves of SnS anode in the discharged state in (c) DEGDME and (d) EC/DEC electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (e) Activation energies across the SEI (Ea,SEI) and charge transfer (Ea,ct) for the TiO2 anode in the DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes. (f) Comparison of the Ea,ct in the DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes for various electrode materials. (g) Atomic fractions of C, O, F, and Na as a function of SEI depth, calculated from the in-depth XPS spectra. (h) Schematic of the comparison of SEI compositions and charge transfer energy barriers in DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes. (e–h) reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature, Copyright 2019. 
The solvent co-intercalation behavior was first discovered in the graphite anode of SIBs. Also, the superior rate capability of graphite was demonstrated. Even at the high rate of 10 and 30 A g−1, a few-layered graphene electrode delivered a high capacity of ∼125 and ∼100 mA h g−1, corresponding to 80% and 65% of the maximum capacity, respectively,.168 In this case, ether solvents have been found to be crucial for the formation of stable Na+-solvent-graphite ternary GICs in the process of Na+-solvent complex co-intercalation in the graphitic interlayers due to the strong solvation ability and high LUMO level.105 Also, solvents with different chain lengths and configurations significantly impact the electrochemical performance of graphite because of their distinct solvation structure and steric hindrance. Kim et al.108 investigated the electrochemical performance of graphite in different ether solvents (DME, DEGDME and TEGDME). The reversible capacity in the three electrolytes was basically the same at 60 °C with the current density of 200 mA g−1, demonstrating the identical full sodiation degree of graphite in the three electrolytes. However, the rate capacity was suggested to depend on the solvent species. The graphite delivered the most promising rate capability in DEGDME electrolyte compared to DME and TEGDME. However, further analysis was lacking. Vitoriano et al.133 provided an explanation of the charging/discharging rate capacity impacted by the dynamics of the three ether solvents considering the Na+ solvation or salt-solvent interactions. For the DME solvent, although its lowest viscosity may endow the fastest Na+ transportation, the less charge screening effect would limit the mobility of the DME molecules. For TEGDME, the bulky solvation sheaths with four chelation sites per molecules inevitably result in sluggish Na+ diffusion and high desolvation energy. Thus, considering the comprehensive properties of viscosity, solvation structure and stability, DEGDME favored the fastest ion transport kinetics.
Soft carbon and hard carbon also demonstrated a similar solvated Na+ intercalation mechanism in ether-based electrolyte.110 Pyrolytic carbon nanosheets with a graphitic structure demonstrated ultrafast sodium storage, presenting a significantly high rate capability at 600C (60 A g−1), while retaining of 68% of its initial capacity.26 In the case of hard carbon, the high rate capability of monodispersed hard carbon nanospheres in ether-based electrolyte was partially attributed to the unique solvated Na+ and Na+ co-intercalation mechanism, which partly avoided the sluggish desolvation process, and therefore accelerated the sodium storage kinetics. It is worth mentioning that the superb rate performance is the result of multi-factor interactions. The unique SEI structure and its properties, the interaction among Na+, the electrolyte and electrode, and structural advantages of the electrode all benefit the fast sodium storage.
5.3.1.2 Ionic conductive SEI layers. 
As mentioned before, the unique SEI properties have an important effect on the battery performance. For example, a robust SEI with great mechanical property significantly benefits the cycling stability. Also, an SEI with ultra-thin thickness contributes to a high ICE value. In the case of the rate performance, a thin and ionic conductive SEI is of great importance for fast ion transfer. Given that the SEI is generated from the decomposition of the electrolyte on the surface of the electrode, its morphology, composition and structure are significantly impacted by the electrolyte species and the electrode/electrolyte interaction. Summarizing the current research, ether-based electrolytes have pronouncedly improved the rate performance of various electrodes compared to the conventional carbonate-based electrolytes. This is significantly due to the favorable ether-derived SEI properties, which enable ultrafast Na+ diffusion.
The rapid interfacial kinetics assisted by ether-based electrolytes have been characterized by the better electrode/electrolyte interface wettability of ethers, decreased polarization, small interfacial resistance, and low charge transfer energy barrier. Their good wettability partly implies the favorable interaction between electrode materials and electrolytes and is beneficial for the electrochemical reaction kinetics. Considering the better rate performance of hard carbon in ether electrolytes compared to carbonate electrolytes, the wettability in these two types of electrolytes were investigated.216 The contact angle of the ether-based electrolyte was nearly 0°, indicating the complete wetting and rapid diffusion at the interface. In comparison, poor wettability was displayed in the carbonate-based electrolyte with the contact angle of 33.1°, corresponding to a poor rate capability. In the case of bulk Bi and ZnSe electrodes, ether-based electrolytes also resulted in better sodiation dynamics and facilitated the reactions, and a small contact angle was also detected.17,319
Low polarization is also an important indicator for fast sodiation kinetics. In the FeS2 anode, a smaller voltage polarization of 0.03 V was demonstrated in ether-based electrolyte, while 0.21 V in carbonate-based electrolytes, indicating the enhanced sodium storage kinetics in the ether electrolytes.235 A similar result was disclosed in a multicore–shell Bi@N-doped carbon nanosphere material.300 Compared with the ether-based electrolyte (DME) with an improved performance (235 mA h g−1 after 2000 cycles at 10 A g−1), severe polarization and structural damage were found in the conventional carbonate-based electrolyte. In the case of the TiO2 electrode, the higher polarization in EC/DEC electrolytes was demonstrated to become more severe with an increase in the scan rate, while the polarization maintained an extremely small value when the scan rate increased in DEGDME electrolyte, corresponding to favorable dynamics.106 Moreover, when evaluating the electrochemical properties of a V2O5-based electrode, the performances of the electrode in different ether solvents (carbonates and ethers such as DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME) and sodium salts (NaPF6, NaClO4, NaTFSI, and NaFSI) were separately compared. The lower polarization and reduced peak potential separation favored fast reaction kinetics in the NaPF6/DEGDME electrolyte.320
It is worth mentioning that the charge transfer resistance tests indicated the interfacial diffusion rate of sodium ions. A smaller interfacial charge transfer impedance in ether-based electrolyte than carbonate-based electrolyte was demonstrated in many electrodes, including carbon,110,216 metal sulfides,21,238 metal selenides273 and oxides.106 This discrepancy was mostly demonstrated by ex situ EIS tests. CuS/rGO electrodes presented the charge transfer resistance of 45.5 Ω in DEGDME, while a much larger value of 365 Ω in EC/PC electrolyte before cycling. After the charge/discharge process, the resistance value of the DEGDME system increased to 120.7 Ω, which was much lower than that of the EC/PC system (1147.5 Ω).21 In the case of TiO2, stable electrochemical impedances were shown in the TiO2/Na cell in DEGDME, namely, Rct1/Rct2 = 9.5/1.5 and 20.8/2.5 Ω for 2 and 100 cycles, respectively. In contrast, the resistances in the traditional carbonate-based electrolytes (EC/DEC) were 382.3/15.2 and 5165/1036 Ω for 2 and 100 cycles, respectively, which were thousands of times larger than that of the cells in ether-based electrolytes.223 The smaller interfacial resistance indicates the presence of a thinner SEI, which could maintain the stability during cycling, benefit the significant restraint of side reactions and enhance sodium storage performance.273 To probe the formation and evolution of the SEI in ether- and carbonate-based electrolytes, in situ EIS measurements were carried out in hard carbon,199 TiO2223 and SnS electrodes.238 The detailed examination of the impedance for the SEI layer (RSEI) and charge transfer (Rct) in the ether-based electrolytes showed that they were much smaller than that in the carbonate-based electrolyte during the whole charge/discharge process in all cases. According to the variation trend of RSEI and Rct in the different electrolytes during the charge/discharge process, the ether-derived SEI quickly stabilized at around 0.5 V, while carbonate-derived SEI remained stable up to 0.2 V. The Rct showed the synergistic changing trend with the RSEI in the ether system, while the Rct in carbonate-based electrolyte did not stabilize until 0.08 V, indicating that the charge transfer process is more sensitive to the SEI layer in carbonate-based electrolytes (Fig. 25c and d, respectively). Thus, it can be concluded that the Na+ insertion kinetics is synergistically dominated by the charge transfer and SEI interface in ether-based electrolytes, while in carbonate it is largely affected by the charge transfer instead of SEI diffusion.199 It is worth noting that the larger RSEI value in the carbonate-based electrolyte inevitably induced a large polarization and overpotential in the discharge process, which may explain the absence of a low-voltage plateau and poor capability at high rate current.238
Additionally, considering the energy consumption of Na+ diffusion at the electrode/electrolyte interface, the energy barrier to charge transfer dominates the interfacial characteristics and the energy storage properties. The dynamic property of the activation energy for SEI diffusion (Ea,SEI) and transport across the SEI/electrode interface (Ea,ct) can be obtained through temperature-dependent EIS tests. The Ea,SEI and Ea,ct of a TiO2 electrode in ether-based electrolyte and carbonate-based electrolyte were compared (Fig. 25e). In both cases, the activation energy for interface transport was higher than that in the SEI layers. Notably, the Ea,ct in the carbonate-based electrolyte was higher by a factor of 2.4 than that in the ether-based electrolyte (specifically, 410 mV vs. 172 mV), indicating the much faster Na+ diffusion across the interface in ether electrolytes. Moreover, the Ea,SEI and Ea,ct of several electrodes such as Sn, CMK-3 and rGO in these two electrolytes were examined. In all the tested systems, the values of Ea,ct in the EC/DEC electrolyte were higher than that in DEGDME electrolyte (Fig. 25f–h).106 The better kinetics in the ether-based electrolyte may also be ascribed to the molecular morphology. It was believed that the 1D flexible chain morphology of the DEGDME solvent may significantly reduce the reaction energy barrier and enhance the reaction dynamics upon intercalation. On the contrary, the poor performance of carbonate-based electrolytes may lie in the morphology of the electrolyte, given that the huge volume of the Na-ester group may retard the sodium storage kinetics.252
It has been suggested that an ether-derived SEI delivers higher interfacial ionic conductivity than a carbonate-derived SEI.106 The crucial role of ether-based electrolytes in accelerating sodiation kinetics can be highlighted by illuminating the special ether-derived SEI composition structure, and thickness. A detailed investigation on the difference between ether-derived SEI and carbonate-derived SEI was conducted in metal selenide, Sn, graphite, rGO, and hard carbon electrode systems (Fig. 26a–e, respectively). Generally, the SEI is composed of organic compounds and inorganic compounds, which are generated form the decomposition of the polar solvent and sodium salts, respectively. The characteristic organic species in the ether-derived SEI is sodium alkoxide (RCH2ONa) and the inorganic species is mainly related to the sodium salts including NaF, Na2O in NaPF6 salts, NaSO3R in NaCF3SO3 salts and NaCl in NaClO4 salts.24,211 Polyethers were reported as the organic species in the ether-derived SEI on the surface of the Sn electrode, which benefited the elastic property of the SEI. Given that ether solvents are the only hydrogen-containing species in the cell, the polymerization/oligomerization reactions of ether molecules were demonstrated by the monitoring the H2 evolution at the electrode/electrolyte interface during cycling via the novel differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) method. Notably, the Sn electrode was believed to catalyze the polymerization/oligomerization reaction of ethers given that H2 generation was not detected in the Sb system even with the same ether electrolytes. According to the XPS analysis in the hard carbon electrode, C–F demonstrated the presence of F-containing organic SEI species, which originated from the TEGDME–PF6− complex. The fluorinated organic compounds could prevent the continuous decomposition of the electrolyte and dissolution of the SEI species, thus significantly benefiting the chemical stability of the SEI film.321 In the case of the composition of the carbonate-derived SEI layers, the organic products are mainly CH3CH2OCO2Na and (CH2OCO2Na)2 and the inorganic species Na2CO3, which are the decomposition products of the carbonate solvent.159 In addition, the composition distribution and structure of the ether-derived SEI and carbonate-derived SEI are distinct. Most of the research on the structure of the ether-derived SEI propose a layer-by-layer structure, which consists of compact organic species located in the exterior layer and inorganic or organic/inorganic components in the interior of the SEI. The compact and thin organic species in the outer layer can possibly prevent the irreversible reaction of surface defects, and thus guarantee the reversible electrochemical behavior of surface defects including oxygen-containing functional groups and edge sites. The organic ingredients can effectively enhance the flexibility of the SEI and maintain the structural integrity of the electrode. Moreover, the inorganic species in the the inner layer can ensure the mechanical property of the ether-derived SEI and facilitate fast Na+ ion diffusion, given that inorganic compounds have low Na+ diffusion activation energies (NaF: 100–150 meV).322 The ether-derived SEI is believed to be inorganic-dominant due to the higher proportion of inorganic species.110,317 On the contrary, the carbonate-derived SEI is a non-uniform mixture of organic and inorganic species. This simply mixed SEI film may induce the continuous generation of the SEI and unstable cycling performance due to the dissolution of inorganic species in the carbonate-based electrolyte. Also, the high content of organic compounds in the carbonate-derived SEI may lead to sluggish ion diffusion and low electrochemical activity.211 Finally, the thickness of the ether-derived SEI is much thinner than that formed in carbonate electrolytes, which significantly shortens the diffusion length of sodium ions and accelerates the sodium storage kinetics. Moreover, in the case of the TiO2 electrode, the formation of a thin SEI in ether-based electrolytes retained the original porous structure, ensuring more Na+ diffusion pathways, while a thick SEI film developed in the carbonate-based electrolytes, gravely blocking the perforated channels for Na+ diffusion to the inside of TiO2, which led to a distinct sodium storage performance in the two electrolytes.224
 Fig. 26  Schematic of ionic conductive SEI in ether-based electrolytes. (a) Schematic illustration of the influence of different electrolytes on the SEI composition in metal selenide anode. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (b) Schematic illustration of SEI formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on Sn anode. (c) Schematic illustration of SEI structure formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on graphite anode. (b and c) reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of SEI structure and composition formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on rGO anode. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of fast sodium storage kinetics in ether-based electrolytes compared to carbonate-based in hard carbon anode. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. Because of the multilayer structure with conductive organic species outside and inorganic species inside, and the thinner thickness, ether-derived SEI behaves more ionic conductive than carbonate-derived SEI and benefits fast sodium storage kinetics. 


5.3.2 Favorable bulk diffusion. 
5.3.2.1 Weak Na+–graphene interaction. 
The commercialization of graphite has been realized in LIBs, benefiting from the low price of its raw material and low intercalation plateau. However, its rate capability is not fascinating enough. On the contrary, in SIBs, despite of its relatively low reversible capacity, graphite possesses excellent rate performance in ether-based electrolyte. The origin of the superior sodiation kinetics at high-rate currents of graphite in SIB compared to LIBs may lie in the weak binding between Na+ and the graphene layers. The weak Na+-graphene interaction impedes the sole intercalation of Na+, while benefiting the co-intercalation of solvated Na+ in the graphene layers. As shown by the reduced interaction energy of graphene with Na-ethers than Na metal in Fig. 27a, the co-intercalation of ether solvent effectively binds the Na+ and graphene layers with ether solvents, forming stable ternary intercalation compounds. The van der Waals interaction between ether the solvent and graphene could enhance the interlayer coupling strength, and thus avoid the exfoliation of graphite. Notably, in the same ether electrolyte with the co-intercalation mechanism, the diffusivity of solvated Na+ was five times as fast as that of solvated Li+, indicating the much faster transport of the Na+-ether complexes. The fast conductivity of the Na+-ether complexes can be attributed to the facile sliding of the flat diglyme molecules. The interaction between the Na+-ether complexes and graphene layers could enable a flat potential energy surface for diffusion, where the Na ions are completely solvated in the interlayer space of graphite, contributing to a very low diffusion barrier (0.13 eV) and ultra-fast sodium storage in graphite. The flat morphology of the Na+-ether complexes is also ascribed to the weak Na+-graphene interaction, leading to fast diffusion. On the contrary, the strong Li+ binding with graphene tends to favor the sole intercalation of Li+ instead of Li+-ether co-intercalation.323 The strong Li+-graphene interaction results in the incomplete solvation of Li+ and molecular distortion of ether solvents in the co-intercalation cells, leading to the large steric hindrance of Li+-ether complexes, and therefore sluggish sodiation kinetics (Fig. 27b). Thus, it can be concluded that the ion-graphene interaction has completely opposite effects on the electrochemical performance of the intercalation and co-intercalation behavior. The strong ion-graphene interaction is more beneficial for the capacity of sole ion intercalation cells, whereas the weak ion-graphene interaction is advantageous for the rate capability of solvent co-intercalation cells.
 Fig. 27  Weak Na+-graphene interaction: (a) relative interaction energy, Ei, between single-layer graphene and metals or metal-solvent complexes. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (b) Optimized structure of Li+–DEGDME and Na+–DEGDME complexes in graphene layers. Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. Na+ and Na+–DME complex migration energy changes (c) without and (d) with electric field. (e) Schematic of high-current working mechanism of graphite demonstrated by in situ synchrotron XRD during cycling at small and high current density. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Springer, Copyright 2021. 
The weak Na+-graphene interaction is also reported to be beneficial for minimal in-plane deformation and good crystallinity of the graphite lattice during the co-intercalation reaction. In this case, the co-intercalated ether solvent encapsulating a sodium ion was believed to act as a “non-stick coating” to accelerate the ion diffusion in the interlayer of graphite.168 Additionally, new insight into the ultra-fast co-intercalation mechanism of graphite was presented. It was believed that at a high-rate current condition, the ether solvent remained in the interior of the graphene layers, while the Na+ were solely de-inserted (Fig. 27c–e). The transmission medium presented a higher diffusion rate under a high current density than normal currents. Also, there may be different mechanisms at the two currents. In situ XRD was employed to investigate the sodiation/desodiation behavior of graphite at 40 mA g−1 and 10 A g−1 respectively. A decrease in Na+ content and maintained high content of ether solvent were verified after charging at high currents. The DFT calculations demonstrated the significant different migration barrier of sole Na+ and Na+–DME complexes in the graphene layers. Without an electric field, the Na+–DME complexes could diffuse faster. Once an electric field was applied, Na+ tended to diffuse preferentially according to the lower diffusion barrier of Na+ than the Na+–DME complexes. Therefore, driven by the electric field at high currents, the separated Na+ and remaining ether molecules in the graphene layers may be responsible for the ultra-fast sodiation dynamics.324
5.3.2.2 Pseudocapacitance-dominant behavior. 
The introduction of pseudocapacitance is an effective approach to improve the rate capability of various electrode materials in SIBs and LIBs. The pseudocapacitive behavior is conducive to much faster charge transfer than bulk lattice diffusion.5 It should be noted that the fast charge transfer and high-rate capability of various electrodes in ether-based electrolytes may be closely related to the pseudocapacitance-dominant behavior.
For the graphite anode, the co-intercalation behavior leads to large volume expansion. However, the expansion of the electrode does not linearly correlate with the amounts of intercalants, as proven by the in situ electrochemical dilatometry (ECD) method.158 The fastest-changing of the electrode thickness occurred at the plateau of the potential profile at 0.6 V vs. Na+/Na. Also, the electrode thickness almost remained stable below this plateau, indicating a pseudocapacitive storage mechanism. Notably, the reason why graphite delivered a great performance in ether electrolyte is not only because the co-intercalation hindered the mutual repulsion between the sodium ions and graphite layers, but also the intercalation pseudocapacitive behavior was beneficial for rapid sodium-intercalated kinetics. The rapid sodiation behavior of graphite can be combined with high-capacity materials. Recently, Wang et al.325 reported well-designed anode materials with Bi nanoparticles intercalated in a graphite layer (Bi@graphite) through the graphite intercalation compound (GIC) pathway. The Bi@graphite composite electrode achieved an ultra-high rate performance, delivering a reversible capacity of 142 mA h g−1 at 20C and maintaining 70% capacity at 300C. The co-intercalation of sodium ions and ether solvent in graphite layers significantly eliminated the desolvation step and improved the pseudocapacitive behavior, and therefore greatly accelerated the reaction kinetics (Fig. 28a). The voltammetric response of the Bi@graphite composite consisted of the characteristic redox peaks of both graphite and Bi materials. Also, the peaks belonging to graphite delivered a capacitive-controlled behavior. Therefore, the high-rate capability can be attributed to the fast capacitive capacity from the graphite sheath.
 Fig. 28  Pseudocapacitance-dominant behavior (a) in Bi@graphite electrode in ether-based electrolytes proved by the CV curves and corresponding b-values of Bi@graphite, graphite and Bi electrodes at different scan rates. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (b) b-Value of hard carbon electrode in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (c) Diffusion coefficients of Bi/C electrodes in DME and EC/DEC electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 300 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Intercalation pseudocapacitance was reported to endow a considerable percentage of capacitive contribution in the whole capacity of a hard carbon anode co-intercalated with Na+-ether. The hard carbon delivered a high diffusion coefficient of charge medium in ether-based electrolyte, indicating fast sodium storage. In comparison, the hard carbon in EC/DEC-based electrolyte presented diffusion-controlled behavior and a lower diffusion coefficient, corresponding to sluggish sodiation kinetics and poor rate capability (Fig. 28b).110 Similarly, Yang et al.184 discovered the adsorption-co-intercalation of Na+-ether in free-standing porous carbon nanofiber films. The electrochemical reaction exhibited pseudocapacitive-dominant behavior, given that the ratio of capacitive contribution to the total capacity was up to 88% at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and reached 95% at 5 mV s−1. Correspondingly, the electrode delivered an excellent rate performance, showing a high capacity of 128 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1. Yun et al.200 also investigated the electrolyte-dependent Na+ transport behaviors in a hard carbon anode. It was demonstrated that the charge delivery mechanism was significantly impacted by the different electrolyte systems (ether-based or carbonate-based). In the carbonate-based electrolyte, the charge carriers (sodium ions) diffused preferably along the disordered carbon structure than the ordered graphitic domains, leading to a poor plateau capacity. Conversely, in the ether-based electrolytes, the charge carriers (Na+-ether complexes) could move along the graphitic pathway, delivering a fast diffusion rate of charge carriers in the ordered graphitic domains. Furthermore, the Na+-ether complexes could catalyze the formation of nanoclusters in the closed pores, which is kinetically favorable. Therefore, the carbon electrodes showed a better rate performance in the ether-based electrolytes. Moreover, a high-rate capability was demonstrated in a multicore-shell Bi@N-doped carbon nanosphere material, achieving an excellent rate performance (178 mA h g−1 at 100 A g−1).300 The diffusion coefficients of sodium ions delivered a higher value in the ether-based electrolyte than the carbonate-based system (Fig. 28c). Also, the capacitive contribution of the total charge storage was up to 90.8% at the scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and reached 98.3% at 0.8 mV s−1 in the ether-based electrolyte. This high ratio of pseudocapacitive contribution enabled the corresponding fast sodium storage kinetics. Similar pseudocapacitive-controlled behavior in ether-based electrolyte was discovered in various electrodes, including TiO2,326 FeS2,256 NiS2,275 and MoO2327 electrodes.
However, it should be noted that ether-based electrolytes are not always beneficial for an improvement in the performance of all types of electrode materials in SIBs. As mentioned before, in some works on hard carbon, although the rate capability of hard carbon was significantly enhanced by ether-based electrolytes, the cycling stability in ether electrolytes was inferior to that in carbonate-based electrolytes. It was believed that the thicker carbonate-derived SEI could provide more effective protection for the hard carbon anode.215 Additionally, although ether-based electrolytes have generally been regarded as applicable for metal sulfide electrodes, recently a voltage failure phenomenon in metal sulfides in ether-based electrolytes was reported by Wang et al.328 It was discovered that the Co1−xS anode faces an abnormal capacity failure after a certain number of stable cycles, showing an unlimited charging phenomenon when the battery cannot reach the given cut-off voltage during the charging process and leading to the failure of battery. The mechanism of “under-voltage failure” was believed to be related to the reactions between polysulfides and copper ions and the shuttle effect. Specifically, the polysulfide intermediates would dissolve in ether-based electrolytes and react with the released Cu2+ from the Cu foil current collector, forming a series of copper sulfides and other species, which lead to the shuttle effect. According to this mechanism, the authors solved the above-mentioned issue by constructing Co1−xS/s-C composites with polar carbon-sulfur bonds to restrain the shuttle effect of the polysulfides and used a carbon current collector instead of the traditional copper to improve the cycle stability. Moreover, although ether-based electrolytes show favorable compatibility with alloy anodes such as Bi, Sn and Pb, the Sb electrode exhibited poor stability in diglyme-based electrolytes compared with cycling in conventional carbonate-based electrolytes. However, the underlying reason for this was not further evaluated.309 Recently, Dsoke et al.329 reported the detrimental effects of diglyme-based electrolytes on the performance of an Sb2O3-based electrode in SIBs. They compared the sodium storage performance of Sb2O3 in three electrolytes based on different solvents (EC/DMC, EC/DMC + 5% FEC, and DEGDME). Owing to the formation of an effective SEI in the FEC-containing electrolyte, Sb2O3 showed the highest stability. The inferior cycling stability in the ether-based electrolytes was ascribed to the fact that ether solvents may coordinate with the Sb3+ formed in the reaction, thus leading to the possible dissolution of Sb ions. Moreover, the dissolved Sb species may migrate to and deposit on the Na metal counter electrode side, which have a negative effect on the cell performance. However, it is worth noting that although Sb-based electrodes show poor compatibility with ether-based electrolytes in SIBs, in potassium-ion batteries, Sb-based materials including micro-sized Sb330 and Sb2O3/rGO electrodes331 exhibited superior stability in ether-based electrolytes comparted to carbonate-based electrolytes. Therefore, the negative effect of ether electrolytes in Sb-based electrodes in SIBs should be further considered through the interactions among ether electrolytes, Sb electrodes and intercalated Na+. In general, although ether-based electrolytes show excellent performances in various electrodes in SIBs, the mechanism of both their positive and negative impacts should be further studied.

6. Conclusion and perspective
6.1 Conclusion
The electrolyte plays a key role in promoting the energy storage performance of batteries because they regulate the interfacial chemistry and electrolyte–electrode interactions. In SIBs, conventional carbonate-based electrolytes are prone to form a dissolved SEI on the electrode surface and exhibit inferior compatibility with several types of electrodes including graphite, alloying anodes, metal sulfides and metal selenides, leading to undesirable capacity decay, poor Coulombic efficiency and low rate capability. In the search for feasible electrolytes, ether-based electrolytes have been found to be suitable choices with superior battery performance in various electrodes. Due to their stable solvation structure and chemical stability, ether-based electrolytes can form a high-quality SEI and show excellent compatibility with electrodes, enabling a highly reversible reaction and fast reaction kinetics. Based on the fact that the uniqueness of ether-based electrolytes in SIBs has only recently been revealed, this comprehensive and timely review aimed to summarize the reasons for their excellent battery performance and stimulate more interest in ether-based electrolytes.
In this review, the fundamentals of ether-based electrolytes including their basic physicochemical properties (e.g., ion transportation and electrochemical stability) and the optimization of the electrolyte components (e.g., solvent, salt, additives and concentration) were comprehensively summarized. In general, ether-based electrolytes possess high ionic conductivity, relatively low oxidative potential, and especially, superior reductive stability. By comparing the properties and solvation effect of different ether solvents and sodium salts, NaCF3SO3 in DEGDME seems to be the most suitable electrolyte due to its high stability, high ionic conductivity and satisfactory SEI formation. Notably, the optimization of the additives and concentration of ether-based electrolytes has been less researched, which need more scientific attention. Subsequently, the uniqueness and mechanism of the superior performance of ether-based electrolytes was intensively discussed. We paid special focus on the solvent co-intercalation behavior in carbon materials given that the electrolyte participates in the redox reaction and strongly influences the cell performance. The performance, behavior, mechanism and conditions of solvent co-intercalation in graphite, soft carbon and hard carbon materials were summarized.
Furthermore, given that ether-based electrolytes can strongly benefit the electrochemical performance of electrodes, the relationship among the chemistry of ether-based electrolytes, interfacial characteristics, electrode properties and battery performance was analyzed, as summarized in Fig. 29. (1) Ether-based electrolytes can regulate the formation of thin, inorganic-rich, and layered SEI on the electrodes, which contributes to a high ICE, stable cycling and high rate capability. Ether-based electrolytes possess highly stable Na+-ether complexes, which is ascribed to the low solvation energy of ether solvents, high electron affinity energy and high LUMO levels of the solvents. The stable Na+-ether complexes represent the high reductive stability of ether solvents, which indicates less decomposition of the electrolyte and the formation of a thin SEI layer. Thin SEI layers are highly responsible for the high ICE in ether-based electrolytes. Besides, it is generally believed that in the first discharge process, sodium salts preferentially decompose to form a robust inorganic inner layer, while the decomposition products of the ether solvent constitute the outer organic layer. The layered SEI with favorable mechanical properties can maintain the structural stability of the electrodes during cycles. Moreover, the thin and ionic conductive ether-derived SEI exhibits a low diffusion energy barrier for charge migration and can enhance the interfacial charge transfer kinetics. (2) Ether-based electrolytes show superb compatibility with electrodes owing to the saturated bonds of ether solvents. The side reaction between the electrolyte and electrode can be effectively inhibited, which is beneficial for the stable and reversible sodium storage reaction. Also, the stable solvation structure enables the reversible solvent co-intercalation mechanism of carbon electrodes. The weak Na+-graphene interaction facilitates the pseudocapacitance-dominant behavior of carbon electrodes in ether-based electrolytes, which contributes to rapid ionic diffusion and high rate capability.
 Fig. 29  Summary of the influencing relationship among electrolyte chemistry, SEI characteristics, electrode properties and battery performance. 
6.2 Perspective
Despite the inspiring superiority of ether-based electrolytes, some issues still need further attention and should be intensively explored in the future (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Perspectives on research directions of ether-based electrolytes for high-performance SIBs. 
(1) Clarifying the influence mechanism of the electrolyte on the behavior and the structure of the electrode. As mentioned, it has been demonstrated that the special solvent co-intercalation behavior in carbon materials is realized by the stable Na+-ether complexes. However, some unique sodium storage behaviors in ether-based electrolytes have been observed but lack of further discussion. For instance, MnS electrodes exhibit a unique voltage platform at 2.0 V in ether-based electrolyte and SnS electrodes also show a long voltage platform below 0.1 V, which are different from that in carbonate-based electrolytes. Although a preliminary conclusion was given for these distinct phenomena, the specific characterization of the reaction mechanism of the voltage platform should be further carried out. In the case of the Na2TP electrode, the electrode reaction was demonstrated to be highly dependent on the electrolyte choice. However, why ether-based electrolytes influence the electrode reaction and whether ether-based electrolytes can induce a structural change in electrodes still remain unclear. In addition, in alloying anodes, porous structural evolution was observed in ether-based electrolytes. However, the mechanism of this structural change has not reached a consensus. Therefore, the special interaction between these electrodes and ether-based electrolytes needs to be further considered and explored.
(2) Enhancing the understanding of the basic characteristics and solvation effect of ether-based electrolytes. The analogous properties of carbonate-based electrolytes were well-studied in lithium- and sodium-ion batteries, but few investigations were carried for ether-based electrolytes. Basic properties of electrolytes are helpful for estimating the scope of their application and guiding their possible direction. However, at present, systematic investigations on the basic characteristics of ether-based electrolytes are lacking, including the influence of different solvents and salts on the properties of ion transportation, electrochemical stability, and thermal stability. Besides, the solvation effect of ether-based electrolytes also requires further investigation. Current research on the solvation behavior of ether-based electrolyte generally focused on the solvents, while the influence of salts has rarely been considered, which may induce inaccurate results given that the solvation environment is composed of both solvents and salts. Moreover, when evaluating the electrochemical stability and HOMO/LUMO levels of different electrolytes, the calculations should be based on the actual solvation structure rather than pure solvent or the same type of solvation structure.
(3) Exploring advanced computational simulation methods and characterization techniques. Currently, the exploration of the special electrolyte/electrode interaction and SEI properties is largely restricted by the existing characterization methods. Owing to the complexity of the SEI, it is difficult to determine its formation, composition, structure and evolution. These properties of ether-derived SEI is still under debate. For instance, whether an SEI exists on the surface of graphite remains unknown. Even in the same type of electrode, the results of the SEI composition and structure are not consistent in the literature. In this case, advanced theoretical simulations and emerging powerful characterization methods are imperative. Advanced computational simulations will be helpful in simulating the behavior of electrolytes, their interaction with the electrodes and the formation and evolution process of the SEI. Moreover, machine learning can predict electrolyte materials with favorable performances. However, calculations are generally based on the ideal reaction conditions, while the actual conditions easily change owing to the complicated reaction environment. Hence, advanced characterization techniques are crucial to directly and accurately obtain the actual properties of electrolytes and interfaces. For example, cryo-electron microscopy, atomic-scale scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy can provide direct macro-/microscopic observation of the morphology, composition and structure of the SEI layer. EQCM and DEMS can be used to detect the intermediates and products during the formation and evolution of the SEI. The AFM technique is useful to measure the surface morphology and the mechanical property of the formed SEI. Moreover, XPS, FTIR and TOF-SIMs are useful tools to reveal the composition and structure of interfaces. Additionally, in situ techniques can be employed to detect the structure and morphology evolution of electrodes and interfaces in real time, including in situ EIS, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in situ AFM, in situ TEM, and in situ STEM.
(4) Promoting the high-voltage stability. The major challenge hindering the practical application of ether-based electrolytes is their limited oxidative stability. Considering the exploration of high-voltage cathodes to boost the energy densities of SIBs, the relatively narrow voltage window of ether-based electrolytes should be extended. However, related studies in SIBs are rare. Drawing lessons from LIBs, increasing the salt concentration and the use of multifunctional additives are effective strategies to improve the high-voltage stability owing to the regulation of the solvation structure. Notably, another breakthrough in chemistry to enhance the oxidation potential has been achieved by molecular design for ether solvents. The rational incorporation of –CF2– units, forming fluorinated ether molecules, significantly improves the high-voltage tolerance from 3.9 V to 5.2 V. Similar concepts can be applied to ether electrolytes in sodium-ion batteries, while additional issues such as ion transportation and interfacial properties need to be considered simultaneously.
(5) Designing novel electrolytes and customizing ideal SEI layer. Clarifying the underlying relations among the solvation effect, interfacial chemistry, electrolyte/electrode interaction and electrochemical performance is crucial for understanding the battery chemistry. Adopting experiences from ether-based electrolytes, it may be feasible to design similar electrolyte solvents with high solvation ability, high LUMO levels and high chemical stability for sodium-ion batteries. Moreover, according to the present results, a favorable SEI with thin thickness, inorganic-rich composition and layered structure, can effectively enhance the battery performance. Hence, it may be possible to customize the electrolyte composition to obtain an ideal SEI layer.
Overall, the further optimization and investigation on ether-based electrolytes and ether-derived SEI can promote the exploration of electrolyte science. The development of electrolyte science, especially the fundamental of interfacial chemistry can greatly motivate the understanding of battery chemistry and the innovation of battery devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21975026, 22005033), the National Postdoctoral Program of China (No. BX20180037, 2018M640077), the Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund Program for Young Scholars (No. XSQD-202108005), and Graduate Interdisciplinary Innovation Project of Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology (Jiaxing, No. GIIP2021-002).
References
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, D. Monti, A. Boschin, B. Steen, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22–42 RSC .
N. Zhu, K. Zhang, F. Wu, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Energy Mater. Adv., 2021, 9204217 Search PubMed .
D. Bin, F. Wang, A. G. Tamirat, L. Suo, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703008 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, G. Chen, X. Wang, H. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Lin, H. Xu, Y. Bai and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22981–22991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ponrouch, E. Marchante, M. Courty, J. M. Tarascon and M. R. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8572–8583 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, R. Dedryvère, D. Monti, A. E. Demet, J. M.-A. Mba, L. Croguennec, C. Masquelier, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2361–2369 RSC .
K. Zhang, Z. Hu, X. Liu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3305–3309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, K. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Chen and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1309–1316 RSC .
C. Wang, L. Wang, F. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 170212 Search PubMed .
M. Cabello, X. Bai, T. Chyrka, G. F. Ortiz, P. Lavela, R. Alcantara and J. L. Tirado, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A3804 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nacimiento, M. Cabello, G. F. Ortiz, R. Alcántara, P. Lavela and J. L. Tirado, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 5417–5424 RSC .
J. Chen, X. Fan, X. Ji, T. Gao, S. Hou, X. Zhou, L. Wang, F. Wang, C. Yang and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1218–1225 RSC .
J. Li, D. Yan, T. Lu, W. Qin, Y. Yao and L. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2309–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, I. Kim, H. Kim, M. K. Sadan, H. Yeo, G. Cho, J. Ahn, J. Ahn and H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22809–22818 RSC .
Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, Z. Hu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 626–634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. W. Wang, W. Lv, S. Zhang, Q. Liang, D. Zheng, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 370–376 RSC .
Y. E. Zhu, L. Yang, X. Zhou, F. Li, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9528–9532 RSC .
S. Y. Cho, M. Kang, J. Choi, M. E. Lee, H. J. Yoon, H. J. Kim, C. Leal, S. Lee, H. J. Jin and Y. S. Yun, Small, 2018, 14, e1703043 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Xu, K. Lim, K. Y. Park, G. Yoon, W. M. Seong and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802099 CrossRef .
S. Rubio, R. R. Maça, M. J. Aragón, M. Cabello, M. Castillo-Rodríguez, P. Lavela, J. L. Tirado, V. Etacheri and G. F. Ortiz, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shadike, M. H. Cao, F. Ding, L. Sang and Z. W. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10486–10489 RSC .
D. T. Pham, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, J. Jo, S. Kim, S. Park, V. Mathew, Y. K. Sun, K. Kim and J. Kim, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1, 83 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, Q. Xia, W. Wang, W. Li and S. Chou, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 376–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. W. Wang, W. Lv, L. Qin, S. Niu, S. Zhang, T. Cao, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801361 CrossRef .
R. Selim and P. Bro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1974, 121, 1457 CrossRef CAS .
V. Koch and J. Young, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 1371–1377 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, H. Teller and P. Dan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Yang, C. Du, Q. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Zhao, B. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Sun and P. Jia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 94–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kushima, K. P. So, C. Su, P. Bai, N. Kuriyama, T. Maebashi, Y. Fujiwara, M. Z. Bazant and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Ren, Y. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, X. Li, J. Xiao, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, W. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1042–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, X. B. Cheng, R. Xu, X. Q. Zhang, C. Yan, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902254 CrossRef CAS .
V. Koch and S. Brummer, Electrochim. Acta, 1978, 23, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dampier and S. Brummer, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 1339–1345 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rauh and S. Brummer, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rauh, T. Reise and S. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 186 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mengeritsky, P. Dan, I. Weissman, A. Zaban and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2110–2116 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, Y. Ein-Eli, I. Weissman, O. Chusid, B. Markovsky, M. Levi, E. Levi, A. Schechter and E. Granot, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
V. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Koch, J. L. Goldman, C. J. Mattos and M. Mulvaney, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
J. Foos and T. Stolki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2769 CrossRef CAS .
K. Abraham, J. Goldman and D. Natwig, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2404 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yoshimatsu, T. Hirai and J. I. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2422 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Dampier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
K. Abraham, D. Pasquariello and F. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Abraham, J. Foos and J. Goldman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 133, 2197–2199 CrossRef .
J. Dahn, U. Von Sacken, M. Juzkow and H. Al Janaby, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2207–2211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Besenhard, Carbon, 1976, 14, 111–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dey and B. Sullivan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. Lim, G. Yoon, J. H. Park, K. Ku, H. D. Lim, Y. E. Sung and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700418 CrossRef .
R. Fong, U. Von Sacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ni, L. Zheng, Y. Bai, T. Liu, H. Ren, H. Xu, C. Wu and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1763–1770 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–16 Search PubMed .
D. Cao, Y. Bai, J. Zhang, G. Tan and C. Wu, Nano Energy, 2021, 106464 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, L. Zheng, Q. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Yue, X. Wang, Y. Bai, G. Tan and C. Wu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5225–5232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Cui, X. Zhang, W. C. McKee, Y. Xu, S. Ling, H. Li, G. Zhong, Y. Yang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 10875–10879 CrossRef .
A. Dunst, V. Epp, I. Hanzu, S. A. Freunberger and M. Wilkening, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2739–2752 RSC .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178–9186 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20127–20134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, D. Hirsberg, M. Salama, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, W. Kwak, Y. K. Sun and D. Aurbach, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5300–5307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, N. C. Lai, Y. R. Lu, Y. Zhou, C. L. Dong and Y. C. Lu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2364–2380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, Y. Mo, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3328–3336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 93–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, B. D. McCloskey, L. F. Nazar and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–11 Search PubMed .
C. L. Bender, P. Hartmann, M. Vračar, P. Adelhelm and J. Janek, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301863 CrossRef .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Valery, A. C. Luntz, S. R. Gowda, G. M. Wallraff, J. M. Garcia, T. Mori and L. E. Krupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Sayed, K. P. Yao, D. G. Kwabi, T. P. Batcho, C. V. Amanchukwu, S. Feng, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9691–9694 RSC .
T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani, S. Yokoishi and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2010, 78, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L.
J. Hardwick, F. Bardé, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sharon, D. Hirshberg, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3269–3272 RSC .
L. Carbone, P. T. Moro, M. Gobet, S. Munoz, M. Devany, S. G. Greenbaum and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16367–16375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sharon, M. Afri, M. Noked, A. Garsuch, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Wang, S. Dong, X. Chen and G. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600751 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, T. Wang, H. Tian, D. Su, Q. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2003666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiong, M. Regula, D. Wang and J. Song, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 388–402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and S. Guo, Matter, 2021, 4, 1142–1188 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yim, M. S. Park, J. S. Yu, K. J. Kim, K. Y. Im, J. H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. N. Jo, S. G. Woo and K. S. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 454–460 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, Y. Sternberg, A. Gorenshtein and Y. Lavi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1621 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. Jung and H. S. Lim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Elias, J. Meng, D. Aurbach, R. Zou, D. Xia and Q. Pang, Joule, 2021, 5, 2323–2364 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, T. Coneglian, M. Gobet, S. Munoz, M. Devany, S. Greenbaum and J. Hassoun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, G. L. Xu, T. Zhao and K. Amine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17634–17640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. U. Patel, R. Demir Cakan, M. Morcrette, J. M. Tarascon, M. Gaberscek and R. Dominko, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1177–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Urbonaite, T. Poux and P. Novák, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500118 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, X. Fan, G. Ji, H. Wang, S. Hou, K. C. DeMella, S. R. Raghavan, J. Wang, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, J. Liu, J. Y. Hwang and Y. K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11582–11605 RSC .
B. Jache and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10333–10337 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, G. Rousse, D. Foix, R. Dugas, D. A. Corte and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9824–9830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yoon, H. Kim, I. Park and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601519 CrossRef .
K. Li, J. Zhang, D. Lin, D. W. Wang, B. Li, W. Lv, S. Sun, Y. B. He, F. Kang, Q. H. Yang, L. Zhou and T. Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Du, M. Song, Y. Wang and F. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900022 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Hong, Y. U. Park, J. Kim, I. Hwang and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hasa, X. Dou, D. Buchholz, Y. Shao-Horn, J. Hassoun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2016, 310, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, L. Zheng, Y. Bai, Q. Ni, Y. Li, F. Wu, H. Ren and C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2008810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Y. Lam, S. S. Zhang, T. R. Jow and T. B. Curtis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7411–7421 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, Y. Lu, X. Sun, H. Zhang, H. Yu and C. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46965–46972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai, X. Han, Y. He, P. Xiong, Y. Zhao, J. Sun and Y. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 324–333 CrossRef .
J. Read, K. Mutolo, M. Ervin, W. Behl, J. Wolfenstine, A. Driedger and D. Foster, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1351–A1356 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, D. Zhou, Y. B. He, Y. Fu, X. Qin, C. Miao, H. Du, B. Li, Q. H. Yang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 278–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, M. Gobet, J. Peng, M. Devany, B. Scrosati, S. Greenbaum and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone, S. Munoz, M. Gobet, M. Devany, S. Greenbaum and J. Hassoun, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 231, 223–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Forsyth, G. M. Girard, A. Basile, M. Hilder, D. MacFarlane, F. Chen and P. Howlett, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 609–617 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monti, E. Jonsson, M. R. Palacin and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 630–636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Lim, F. Shojaei, K. Park, C. S. Jung, J. Park, W. I. Cho and H. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7047–7057 RSC .
S. R.-G. Kankanamge and D. G. Kuroda, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 833–841 RSC .
E. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. X. Yin and Y. G. Guo, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 3, 18–41 CrossRef .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Shen, B. Li, H. J. Peng, X. B. Cheng, B. Q. Li, X. Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 734–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peljo and H. H. Girault, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2306–2309 RSC .
Q. Ni, Y. Bai, Y. Li, L. Ling, L. Li, G. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Ren, F. Wu and C. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702864 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiang, K. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5343–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, P. Bai, X. Ji, J. Yang, C. Wang and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wahlers, K. D. Fulfer, D. P. Harding, D. G. Kuroda, R. Kumar and R. Jorn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17949–17959 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Dhumal and S. P. Gejji, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 219–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, S. R. Galle Kankanamge, T. K. Weldeghiorghis, R. Jorn, D. G. Kuroda and R. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 122, 4747–4756 CrossRef .
N. O. Vitoriano, I. R. de Larramendi, R. L. Sacci, I. Lozano, C. A. Bridges, O. Arcelus, M. Enterría, J. Carrasco, T. Rojo and G. Veith, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 29, 235–245 CrossRef .
L. Seidl, N. Bucher, E. Chu, S. Hartung, S. Martens, O. Schneider and U. Stimming, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1631–1642 RSC .
X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, H. R. Li and Q. Zhang, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 128–131 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Henderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13177–13183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wen, Z. Deng, P. C. Tsai, Z. W. Lebens-Higgins, L. F. Piper, S. P. Ong and Y. M. Chiang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lutz, D. Alves Dalla Corte, M. Tang, E. Salager, M. Deschamps, A. Grimaud, L. Johnson, P. G. Bruce and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6066–6075 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Eshetu, T. Diemant, M. Hekmatfar, S. Grugeon, R. J. Behm, S. Laruelle, M. Armand and S. Passerini, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 327–340 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Eshetu, M. Martinez Ibañez, E. Sánchez Diez, I. Gracia, C. Li, L. M. Rodriguez Martinez, T. Rojo, H. Zhang and M. Armand, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2770–2780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dugas, A. Ponrouch, G. Gachot, R. David, M. R. Palacín and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2333 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, L. Xing, J. Chen, H. Zhou, S. Liang, W. Huang and W. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 822, 153530 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Fan, P. Dai, C. G. Shi, Y. Wen, C. X. Luo, J. Yang, C. Song, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010500 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Hwang, Y. Tonouchi, K. Matsumoto and R. Hagiwara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3637–3647 RSC .
J. Shi, L. Ding, Y. Wan, L. Mi, L. Chen, D. Yang, Y. Hu and W. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 57, 650–655 CrossRef .
H. Wang, C. Wang, E. Matios and W. Li, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 7860–7863 CrossRef .
P. Li, Z. Jiang, X. Huang, X. Lu, J. Xie and S. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2021, 106396 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6783–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Bernal and R. H. Fowler, J. Chem. Phys., 1933, 1, 515–548 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Borodin, J. Self, K. A. Persson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2020, 4, 69–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2406 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 2229–2235 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. Bommier, W. Luo, L. Jiang, Y. Hao and Y. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 6–23 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, K. Furukawa, K. Sodeyama, K. Kikuchi, M. Yaegashi, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5039–5046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yoshida, M. Nakamura, Y. Kazue, N. Tachikawa, S. Tsuzuki, S. Seki, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Lee, S. M. Lee, J. H. Choi, H. Kim, M. S. Kwon, K. Kang, K. T. Lee and N. S. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3723–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Lu, Q. Zhou, X. Qi, Q. Meng, X. Rong, L. Chen and Y. S. Hu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1156–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Bai, G. Chen, Y. Li, X. Wang, H. Xu, C. Wu and J. Lu, Small, 2020, 16, 2003268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Guo, X. Du, X. Lin, J. Q. Huang, H. Tan, Y. Zhu and B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1550–1557 RSC .
M. Yoshio, H. Wang, K. Fukuda, T. Umeno, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1754–1758 RSC .
P. Ge and M. Fouletier, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28, 1172–1175 CrossRef .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Ma, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L169–L170 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nobuhara, H. Nakayama, M. Nose, S. Nakanishi and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 3735–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Okamoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 118, 16–19 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Hong, G. Yoon, H. Kim, K. Y. Park, M. S. Park, W. S. Yoon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2963–2969 RSC .
A. P. Cohn, K. Share, R. Carter, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 543–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Malard, M. A. Pimenta, G. Dresselhaus and M. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rep., 2009, 473, 51–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chacón-Torres, A. Ganin, M. Rosseinsky and T. Pichler, Phys. Rev. B, 2012, 86, 075406 CrossRef .
M. Goktas, C. Bolli, E. J. Berg, P. Novák, K. Pollok, F. Langenhorst, M. V. Roeder, O. Lenchuk, D. Mollenhauer and P. Adelhelm, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702724 CrossRef .
B. Jache, J. O. Binder, T. Abe and P. Adelhelm, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14299–14316 RSC .
P. Han, X. Han, J. Yao, Z. Liu, X. Cao and G. Cui, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 61, 84–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rodríguez-García, I. Cameán, A. Ramos, E. Rodríguez and A. B. García, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 236–244 CrossRef .
M. Hu, H. Zhou, X. Gan, L. Yang, Z. H. Huang, D. W. Wang, F. Kang and R. Lv, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1582–1589 RSC .
W. Zuo, R. Liu, G. F. Ortiz, S. Rubio, T. Chyrka, P. Lavela, S. Zheng, J. L. Tirado, D. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Cohn, N. Muralidharan, R. Carter, K. Share, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14954–14959 RSC .
L. Wang, J. Yang, J. Li, T. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Wu, J. Qiu, B. Wang, P. Gao and X. Niu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 409, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kim, S. C. Jung, S. Ha, Y. Kim, Y. Park, J. H. Ryu, Y. K. Han and K. T. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3199–3203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jache and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10169–10173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A803–A811 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Pol, E. Lee, D. Zhou, F. Dogan, J. M. Calderon-Moreno and C. S. Johnson, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, Q. Sun, J. Liu, B. Xiao, P. A. Glans, J. Li, R. Li, J. Guo, W. Yang, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4378–4387 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, R. Xu and Y. Yu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 105–112 CrossRef .
D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, H. Zhao, X. Wang, M. Zhang, R. Dong, Y. Li, Y. Bai, H. Xu and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10544–10553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, Z. Minghao, B. Ying, W. Xinran, D. Ruiqi and W. Chuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(13), 12554–12561 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Yuan, Y. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Li, F. Wu, K. Amine, C. Wu and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702781 CrossRef .
X. Feng, Y. Bai, M. Liu, Y. Li, H. Yang, X. Wang and C. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2036–2089 RSC .
W. Feng, D. Ruiqi, B. Ying, L. Yu, C. Guanghai, W. Zhaohua and W. Chuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(25), 21335–21342 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, Y. Bai, L. Zheng, M. Liu, Y. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Li and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(47), 56285–56295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, F. Wu, Y. Bai, Y. Li, H. Ren, R. Zhao, X. Feng, T. Song and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 47671–47683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Yang, Y. Li, S. Guo, G. Chen, Y. Li, H. Xu and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 2481–2489 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Qiu, L. Xiao, M. L. Sushko, K. S. Han, Y. Shao, M. Yan, X. Liang, L. Mai, J. Feng and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700403 CrossRef .
H. Lu, F. Ai, Y. Jia, C. Tang, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Small, 2018, 14, 1802694 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Saurel, B. Orayech, B. Xiao, D. Carriazo, X. Li and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703268 CrossRef .
Z. Biao, G. Camélia Matei, L. Christel, V. G. Cathie and T. Jean-Marie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1, 1501588 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Feng, Y. Bai, H. Yang, R. Dong, X. Wang, H. Xu, Q. Wang, H. Li and H. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003854 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, F. A. Soto, M. Gu, K. S. Han, J. Song, H. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, V. Murugesan, K. T. Mueller, D. Reed, V. L. Sprenkle, P. B. Balbuena and X. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801441 CrossRef .
M. E. Lee, S. M. Lee, J. Choi, D. Jang, S. Lee, H. J. Jin and Y. S. Yun, Small, 2020, 16, 2001053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, H. Cai, C. Xu, R. Huang, S. Wang, H. Pan and Y. S. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cabello, T. Chyrka, R. Klee, M. J. Aragón, X. Bai, P. Lavela, G. M. Vasylchenko, R. Alcántara, J. L. Tirado and G. F. Ortiz, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Wu, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 105738 Search PubMed .
K. Urita, N. Ide, K. Isobe, H. Furukawa and I. Moriguchi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3614–3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Lu, Q. Meng, A. C. Jensen, Q. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Tong, Y. Qi, L. Gu and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902852 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. An, J. Li, C. Daniel, D. Mohanty, S. Nagpure and D. L. Wood III, Carbon, 2016, 105, 52–76 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Q. Wang, D. Chen, Y. Zhong, Z. Wu, Y. Song, G. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Zhong and X. Guo, Green Chem., 2021, 12, 4531–4539 RSC .
P. Ganesh, P. Kent and D. E. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24476–24481 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Zhang, W. Lv, C. Luo, C. H. You, J. Zhang, Z. Z. Pan, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 3, 18–23 CrossRef .
N. N. Intan and J. Pfaendtner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8169–8180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Luo, G. Ma, F. Tian, Y. Li, D. Zhang and J. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 40, 189–196 CrossRef .
D. Su, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501785 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Xing, K. Xu, H. Zhou, J. Lan, C. Wang and W. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 32–39 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. Liu, X. Feng, Y. Li, F. Wu, Y. Bai and C. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3307–3320 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bai, Y. He, P. Xiong, X. Zhao, K. Xu and Y. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 274–282 CrossRef .
Y. He, P. Bai, S. Gao and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41380–41388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Z. Liu, F. Pourpoint, A. R. Armstrong, C. P. Grey and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2164–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806510 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Ni, R. Dong, Y. Bai, Z. Wang, H. Ren, S. Sean, F. Wu, H. Xu and C. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 903–911 CrossRef .
Y. E. Zhu, L. Yang, J. Sheng, Y. Chen, H. Gu, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701222 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Z. Cai, J. Zhou, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18278–18283 RSC .
Q. Xia, Z. Lin, W. Lai, Y. Wang, C. Ma, Z. Yan, Q. Gu, W. Wei, J. Z. Wang and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14125–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Das, B. Jache, H. Lahon, C. L. Bender, J. Janek and P. Adelhelm, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1428–1431 RSC .
R. Yang, L. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Cui, Y. Du, S. Liu, H. Wang and M. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3399–3407 RSC .
T. Kajita and T. Itoh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1003–1009 RSC .
H. Kim, S. W. Lee, K. Y. Lee, J. W. Park, H. S. Ryu, K. K. Cho, G. B. Cho, K. W. Kim, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 6422–6426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Roy, P. K. Dutta and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20491–20496 RSC .
J. Choi, W. S. Kim, K. H. Kim and S. H. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17437–17443 RSC .
X. Fan, T. Gao, C. Luo, F. Wang, J. Hu and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Palaniselvam, C. Mukundan, I. Hasa, A. L. Santhosha, M. Goktas, H. Moon, M. Ruttert, R. Schmuch, K. Pollok and F. Langenhorst, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Wang, L. Wang, L. Tang, M. Zhu, C. Wu, S. X. Dou and M. Wu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2575–2582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, D. Y. Kim, G. B. Cho, T. H. Nam, K. W. Kim, H. S. Ryu, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, M. Li, T. Yu, C. Wang, Y. Zeng, X. Hu, G. Chen, G. Yang and F. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10619–10628 RSC .
Y. Fang, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 7826–7830 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Q. Pang, Y. Wei, L. Wei, Y. Ju, B. Zou, Y. Gao and G. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4778–4785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. Wang, S. Chou, Y. Xu, W. Li, B. Kong, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, Y. Ma, T. Chen, Q. Xia, M. Yang, H. Xia and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12658–12667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, N. R. Kim, K. Lim, K. Ku, H. J. Yoon, J. G. Kang, K. Kang, P. V. Braun, H. J. Jin and Y. S. Yun, Small, 2017, 13, 1700767 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, R. Tan, L. Yang, J. Zheng, K. Zhang, S. Mo, Z. Lin and F. Pan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 139–159 CrossRef .
X. Ma, L. Zou and W. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10507–10510 RSC .
Y. Li, F. Wu and S. Xiong, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 582–589 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ou, J. Li, F. Zheng, P. Wu, Q. Pan, X. Xiong, C. Yang and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 483–491 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. Li, G. Zhang, D. Sun, J. Zhou and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34193–34201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, M. Li, X. Yang, D. Yu, Y. Zeng, C. Wang, G. Chen and F. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1900323 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Zhou, X. Chen and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30379–30387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, S. H. Lee and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601329 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Qian, M. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Wang, M. Li, Y. Bai, Q. An, H. Xu and F. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, H. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Chen and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7395–7398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Q. Liu, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700606 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Z. Hu, R. Jiao, Z. Tang, P. Dong, Y. Li, S. Li and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 228–234 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, L. Suo, T. Gao, X. Fan, F. Han and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 54, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, C. Tang, Q. An, M. Yan, X. Wang, P. Hu, X. Cai and L. Mai, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3202–3211 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, S. Shen, L. Cheng, L. Ma, J. Zhou, H. Ye, N. Han, T. Wu, Y. Li and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4137–4142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ge, H. Hou, S. Li, L. Yang and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801765 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, Z. Zhao, X. Hao, Y. Wei, H. Zhang, Y. Dong, Y. Wang, X. Pan, Y. Hou and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4469–4479 RSC .
C. Lv, H. Liu, D. Li, S. Chen, H. Zhang, X. She, X. Guo and D. Yang, Carbon, 2019, 143, 106–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wan, R. Zeng, K. Chen, G. Liu, W. Chen, L. Wang, N. Zhang, L. Xue, W. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 114–121 CrossRef .
X. Xu, J. Liu, J. Liu, L. Ouyang, R. Hu, H. Wang, L. Yang and M. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707573 CrossRef .
S. Peng, X. Han, L. Li, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, M. Srinivansan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Small, 2016, 12, 1359–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, W. Shi, P. Lu, J. Qin, S. Zheng, B. Zhang, X. Bao and Z. S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14324–14329 RSC .
L. Zhou, K. Zhang, J. Sheng, Q. An, Z. Tao, Y. M. Kang, J. Chen and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, X. Cheng, Y. Huang, L. Gong and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35820–35828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, X. Cheng, L. Gong, L. Shi, Y. Deng and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18967–18978 RSC .
Y. Fang, B. Y. Guan, D. Luan and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 7821–7825 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, M. Park, L. Zhou, G. H. Lee, W. Li, Y. M. Kang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6728–6735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Z. Zhao, X. Hao, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Hou, Q. Yang, X. Wang and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13591–13600 RSC .
P. Ge, H. Hou, S. Li, L. Huang and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14716–14726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ali, T. Tang, X. Huang, Y. Wang, M. Asif and Y. Hou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 19–28 CrossRef .
C. Cui, Z. Wei, G. Zhou, W. Wei, J. Ma, L. Chen and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7088–7098 RSC .
X. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Denis and A. L. Rogach, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
E. Xu, P. Li, J. Quan, H. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Chang, Z. Sun, L. Chen, D. Yu and Y. Jiang, Nano-Micro lett., 2021, 13, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Sun, Z. Cheng, X. Xu, J. Pan, X. Yang, F. Tian, Y. Li, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 275–283 CrossRef .
H. Li, J. Jiang, J. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Zhang, B. J. Hwang and J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13491–13498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sun, S. Liu, Q. Wei, J. Sheng, S. Zhu, Q. An and L. Mai, Small, 2017, 13, 1701744 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lu, T. Zhu, H. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Li, A. Abdelkader, K. Xi, W. Wang, Y. Li and S. Ding, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 762–772 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian and S. P. Lau, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 62–67 CrossRef .
X. Ou, C. Yang, X. Xiong, F. Zheng, Q. Pan, C. Jin, M. Liu and K. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606242 CrossRef .
X. Wang, D. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Chen, X. Zhang and M. Xue, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8645–8650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ni, Y. Bai, S. Guo, H. Ren, G. Chen, Z. Wang, F. Wu and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5183–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, M. Wei, J. Feng, Y. Ma and S. Xiong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1430–1438 RSC .
C. Zhu, P. Kopold, W. Li, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500200 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, M. Park, L. Zhou, G. H. Lee, J. Shin, Z. Hu, S. L. Chou, J. Chen and Y. M. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12822–12826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Jiang, F. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2235–2241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Ji, M. Gu and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20957–20964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mu, Y. Lu, X. Wu, Y. Ding, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 63–70 CrossRef .
S. W. Zhang, T. Cao, W. Lv, J. Zhang, Y. Tao, F. Kang, D. W. Wang and Q. H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105203 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sk and S. Manzhos, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 572–581 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, X. L. Wu, J. Z. Guo, J. Y. Li, J. P. Zhang, L. Niu and R. S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 450–457 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Q. Wei, Q. An, L. Huang, W. Luo, X. Ren, K. A. Owusu, F. Dong, L. Li and P. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 625–631 CrossRef .
T. L. Ho, Chem. Rev., 1975, 75, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lao, Y. Zhang, W. Luo, Q. Yan, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700622 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Chevrier and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, 1011–1014 CrossRef .
W. Luo, F. Shen, C. Bommier, H. Zhu, X. Ji and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, T. H. Kim, K. S. Hong and H. S. Kwon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11824–11835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Chen, L. Z. Fan and L. Jiao, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 170–178 CrossRef .
F. Q. Liu, W. P. Wang, Y. X. Yin, S. F. Zhang, J. L. Shi, L. Wang, X. D. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. J. Zhou and L. Li, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 5383 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xiong, P. Bai, A. Li, B. Li, M. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Huang, Q. Jiang, X. H. Bu and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, D. Li, Y. Wu, R. Xu and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4913–4921 RSC .
H. Yang, R. Xu, Y. Yao, S. Ye, X. Zhou and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809195 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, J. Chen, M. Chen, J. Wang, X. Liu, B. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Li, L. Gu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807874 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kang, Y. Liu, K. Cao, Y. Zhao, L. Jiao, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17899–17913 RSC .
L. Liu, F. Xie, J. Lyu, T. Zhao, T. Li and B. G. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 321, 11–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bridel, S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, J. Hassoun, P. Reale, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2036–2043 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ying, S. Zhang, Z. Meng, Z. Sun and W. Q. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8334–8342 RSC .
D. Bresser, F. Mueller, D. Buchholz, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 128, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Oh, S. T. Myung, M. W. Jang, B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun and Y. K. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3827–3833 RSC .
C. Kim, K. Y. Lee, I. Kim, J. Park, G. Cho, K. W. Kim, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2016, 317, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
W. Brehm, J. R. Buchheim and P. Adelhelm, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900389 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jow, L. Shacklette, M. Maxfield and D. Vernick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1730–1733 CrossRef CAS .
A. Darwiche, R. Dugas, B. Fraisse and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, M. K. Sadan, C. Kim, S. H. Choe, K. K. Cho, K. W. Kim, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16239–16248 RSC .
J. Y. Park, S. J. Kim, K. Yim, K. S. Dae, Y. Lee, K. P. Dao, J. S. Park, H. B. Jeong, J. H. Chang and H. K. Seo, Adv. Sci., 2019, 1900264 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Klein, R. Pinedo, B. Z.-B. Berkes, J. R. Janek and P. Adelhelm, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8679–8691 CrossRef CAS .
M. Metzger, C. Marino, J. Sicklinger, D. Haering and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, 1123 CrossRef .
M. Goktas, C. Bolli, E. J. Berg, P. Novak, K. Pollok, F. Langenhorst, M. V. Roeder, O. Lenchuk, D. Mollenhauer and P. Adelhelm, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702724 CrossRef .
B. Qin, A. Schiele, Z. Jusys, A. Mariani, T. Diemant, X. Liu, T. Brezesinski, R. J. Behm, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 3697–3708 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cai, Y. X. Yao, G. L. Zhu, C. Yan, L. L. Jiang, C. He, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3806–3833 RSC .
Y. He, L. Wang, C. Dong, C. Li, X. Ding, Y. Qian and L. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 35–45 CrossRef .
X. Liu, B. Qin, H. Zhang, A. Moretti and S. Passerini, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2786–2793 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, P. Shi, H. Xiang, X. Liang and Y. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, 1805479 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Choudhury, S. Wei, Y. Ozhabes, D. Gunceler, M. J. Zachman, Z. Tu, J. H. Shin, P. Nath, A. Agrawal and L. F. Kourkoutis, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Jung, Y. J. Kang and Y. K. Han, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 456–462 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiang, Y. Hu, W. Bi, H. Jiang and C. Li, Sci. China Mater, 2021, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Fan, X. Ji, T. Gao, S. Hou, X. Zhou, L. Wang, F. Wang, C. Yang, L. Chen and C. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1218–1225 RSC .
Z. Liu, W. Zhang, Z. Zhou, X. Liu, H. Zhang and M. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3619–3627 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. Son, W. I. Choi, G. O. Park, Y. Kim, H. Kim, M. Jeong, H. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and W. S. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, F. Han, Y. He, J. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Tao, C. Zhang, F. Zhang and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pfeifer, M. F. Greenstein, D. Aurbach, X. Luo, H. Ehrenberg and S. Dsoke, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3487–3495 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, Y. Gao and B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102562 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, N. Zhuang, J. Xie, X. Li, W. Zhuo, H. Wang, J. B. Na, X. Li, Y. Yamauchi and W. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903455 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Ying Li
	Ying Li received her MS Degree from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 2019 and continued her research as a PhD candidate supervised by Prof. Feng Wu. Her research focuses on the design of high-performance electrolytes and electrode materials for rechargeable batteries.

Feng Wu
	Feng Wu is currently a professor at BIT. He is the Director of the Green Energy Research Institute. As the Chief Scientist, he has hosted three “National Program on Key Basic Research Projects (973 Programs)”. He has published over 600 papers and authorized over 90 patents. In 2012, he was awarded the IBA Research Award for outstanding research on battery materials and systems for electric vehicles. In 2017, Prof. Wu was elected as an Academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering.

Yu Li
	Yu Li obtained her PhD majoring in Environmental Engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) and is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at BIT. Her research interests focus on high performance rechargeable batteries system. As the Principal Investigator, Dr Li successfully hosted the National Natural Science Foundation, China Postdoctoral Innovative Talent Support Program, etc. She has authored/co-authored over 40 research papers in the battery field.

Ying Bai
	Ying Bai is currently a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). Her research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. Dr Bai earned her Bachelor's Degree from the Applied Chemistry Division at Harbin Institute of Technology, China (HIT) in 1997. She completed her PhD at the School of Chemical Engineering & Materials Science at BIT in 2003. In 2013, she was awarded New Century Excellent Talents in University from the Chinese Ministry of Education. She hosted and is hosting projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China as a Principal Investigator.

Chuan Wu
	Chuan Wu is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), where his interests are new energy materials and secondary batteries based on multi-electron materials. He received his PhD Degree in Applied Chemistry from BIT in 2002, followed by a 2 year postdoctoral fellowship in Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is experienced in energy conversion and storage. Dr Wu was awarded the Beijing Outstanding Talents Cultivation Project in 2007, Beijing Nova Program Award in 2009, and New Century Excellent Talents in University in 2012.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of physical/chemical properties of Li and Na. (b) Multi-angle comparison of different types of electrolytes (organic electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes and solid electrolytes) with crucial properties of conductivity, safety, compatibility, cost and oxidative stability. Organic electrolytes provide technical superiorities under comprehensive consideration. (c) Proportion of research on ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes in sodium batteries (last updated on 20th September 2021). The keywords used for the search in the Web of Science were “ether electrolyte sodium battery”, and “carbonate electrolyte sodium battery”. (d) Number of publications dealing with ether-based electrolyte for sodium batteries from 1990 to September 2021. (e) The roadmap of the important works of ether-based electrolytes for SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Performances of sodium ion batteries involving EBEs and CBEs. (a) Schematic of electrochemical performances of batteries determined by their capacity, ICE, cycle stability and rate capability. (b) Cycle numbers and capacity retention rates of the same electrode materials in EBEs and CBEs. (c) ICE and capacity values of the same electrode in the above-mentioned two electrolytes. (d) Rate capabilities of the same electrode in the above-mentioned two electrolytes. The performance is evaluated based on single electrodes in half-cells. The filled dots represent the electrode performance in ether-based electrolytes, while the hollow dots represent the electrode performance in carbonate-based electrolytes. Data for performance analysis is based on carbon electrodes, alloying electrodes, metal sulfides, metal oxides, and metal selenides, which are labeled in red, orange, blue, green and purple, respectively. They were last updated on 20th September 2021.	 

 	Fig. 3  Relations among electrolyte, SEI, electrode and the output performance of batteries.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the solvation behavior and the four pathways for ether-based electrolytes to influence the battery performance.	 

 	Fig. 5  Development history of ether-based electrolytes: failure in early Li-based battery (reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2000) and Li-ion battery (reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2007), and reviving in Li–O2 battery (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016) and Li–S battery (reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the electrolyte components (solvents, salts, additives and concentration) determining the electrolyte performance (conductivity, compatibility, electrochemical stability, thermal stability and chemical stability) through solvation effects and physicochemical properties. The common solvents, salts and additives in ether-based electrolyte and their ball-and-stick models are represented.	 

DME	

	−58	84	7	0.46	7.2
DEGDME	

	−60	162	57	1.06	7.4
TEGDME	

	−30	275	140	3.39	7.5
EC	

	36	248	160	1.9 (40 °C)	89.7
PC	

	−48	242	132	2.53	64.9
DEC	

	−74	126	31	0.75	2.8
DMC	

	5	91	18	0.59	3.1

 	Fig. 7  (a) LUMO and HOMO levels of ether solvents (DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME) and carbonate solvents (EC, DEC, and PC), and their corresponding solvent-ion complexes. Reproduced data from ref. 27 and 129, with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018 and 2021, respectively. (b) Relation between the HOMO/LUMO levels and the electrolyte stability window. (c) Reported oxidation potentials of ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced data from ref. 27, 118, and 108, with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018, 2021 and 2015, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optimized structure of ether solvents and their Na-solvent complexes: (a) DME, (b) DEGDME, and (c) TEGDME. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) Solvation energy of Na-solvent complexes of different ethers and carbonates. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Comparison of the chemical and physical properties of different ethers (DME, DEGDME, and TEGDME), respectively. (c) Summary of the proportion of different ethers applied in sodium ion batteries. (d) Summary of the characteristics and merits of different ethers. (e and f) Comparison of the chemical and physical properties of DEGDME and conventional carbonates (EC, PC, and DEC), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of (a) SSIP, (b) CIP, and (c) AGG. (d) Summary of the proportion of different salts applied in sodium ion batteries. (c) Conductivity and viscosity of 1 M various salts in PC-based electrolytes. (d) Electrochemical window of 1 M various salts in PC-based electrolytes. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of energy diagram of electrolyte with functional additives. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (b) Calculated solvation energy and LUMO energy levels of Na-DME complexes and VC-containing electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of the influence of concentration. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of decomposition pathways of (a) ether solvent (DEGDME) and (b) carbonate solvents (DMC and EC). (c) Summary of the decomposition products of DEGDME, DEC and EC.	 

 	Fig. 13  Co-intercalation behavior of ether solvents in graphite. Performance and behavior: (a) stable charge–discharge curves. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of favorable Na+-ether co-intercalation in graphene layers and unfavorable sole Na+ intercalation in carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. Mechanism: (c) structural evolution of graphite during sodiation/desodiation process proven by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction analysis. (d) Schematic of height and lattice parameters of graphite at different stage GICs. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (e) In situ Raman spectra (normalized) and the Lorentzian fitting of GC (blue line) and GUC (red line) of few-layered graphene, showing the highly ordered staging reaction. (f) Change in Raman positions of GC and GUC during the electrochemical intercalation reaction with the corresponding galvanostatic discharge profile. (e and f) reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. (g) Summary of the solvent dependency in the co-intercalation phenomenon. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  Co-intercalation behavior of ether solvents in soft carbon: performance and mechanism. (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of CNFs-1300 for the first three cycles at 0.2 A g−1. (b) Sodium storage behavior CNFs-1300 electrode proven by the contribution ratio of the capacitive capacity at different scan rates. (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profile of the PCN-2800//HN-PP cell and rate capabilities at a current rate in the range of 0.2 to 20 A g−1. (d) Co-intercalation in PCN-2800 proven by in situ XRD. (e) Schematic illustration of co-intercalation behavior of CNFs-1300 in the charge and discharge process. (a, b, and e) Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Stable TEGDME–Na+ complexes expand the edge of the carbon layers in hard carbon (as shown in the black circle). Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and composition of carbonate-derived SEI and ether-derived SEI, containing a pseudo-SEI originating from the co-intercalation of Na-TEGDME complexes in the surface of carbon layers. (c) Pseudo-SEI demonstrated by HRTEM of hard carbon in 1 M NaPF6-TEGDME electrolyte after 150 cycles. (b and c) reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (d) Calculation of the initial and final structure of Na+–DEGDME in carbon layers. (e) Co-intercalation of Na+–DEGDME proved by FTIR and XRD analysis of hard carbon electrode in discharged and charged state. (d and e) reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 16  Stable Na+–ether complexes. (a) Solvation energies of possible solvation structures in different electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (b) Solvation energy of solvents and PF6− with Na+ in DEGDME-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Total energy of Na+ bonded with PC, DMC, and TEGDME solvents. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. Calculated electron affinity energy of (d) different solvents, Na+, PF6− and NaPF6 and (e) Na+–DEGDME complexes with and without PF6−. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 17  High ICE and thin SEI formed in ether-based electrolytes: performance and characterization. (a) Improved ICE in the ether-based electrolytes of HSSAC anode. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (b) Improved ICE of hard carbon in ether-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (c) Higher ICE of hard carbon anode in ether-based electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. Thin SEI demonstrated by (d) HAADF and HRTEM images of cycled HCNS electrode and (e) AFM force spectroscopy and TOF-SIMS profiles of the formed SEI films in DEGDME-based and EC/DEC-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (f) SEM and HRTEM images of cycled TiO2 electrode. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  Stable cycle performance benefiting from the high chemical stability of ether solvents: performance and mechanism. (a) Reaction formula of EC, PC, DEC, and DMC with polysulfides. Reproduced from ref. 283 with Permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (b) Reaction formula and free energy of ether- and carbonate-based electrolytes with polyselenides. Reproduced from ref. 284 with Permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (c) Optimized adsorption structure and binding energy of Na2Se with PC and DEGDME solvent. Reproduced from ref. 272 with Permission from Springer, Copyright 2021. Stable cycling life: (d) FeS2, reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (e) FeSe2, reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. (f) CoS2, reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  Unique sodium storage behavior. Distinct voltage platform of SnS electrode in (a) DEGDME-based and (b) EC/DEC-based electrolytes. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. Variation in the sodiation depth of TiO2 electrode in (c) DEGDME-based and (d) EC/DEC-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature, Copyright 2019. (e) First two cycle discharge capacities and (f) CV curves of organic Na2TP/G electrode in DEGDME-based and EC/DEC-based electrolytes demonstrate the one-step sodiation in ether-based electrolytes, while two-step sodiation in carbonate-based electrolytes. (g) One-step sodiation is related to the structural change in diglyme-based electrolyte, as proven by electrolyte-shuffling experiment. (e–g) reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 20  Cu-Driven electrochemical mechanism of metal sulfides and selenides in ether-based electrolytes. Schematic of (a) Cu-driven conversion mechanism for transition metal chalcogenides and (b) structure of the working electrode during cycling process. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (c) Electrochemical transition from metal selenides to Cu2−xSe according to the electrochemical properties in the 5th and 500th cycles, and the hard–soft–acid–base (HSAB) theory proposed to explain the transition. (d) Schematic of electrochemically induced transition from MnS to Cu2−xS. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 21  Porous structural evolution: (a) SEM images of structural change in different electrolytes, before and after cycling and (b) corresponding schematic of structural evolution in bulk Bi electrode. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (c) SEM images of porous structure change in ether-based electrolytes and (d) mechanism of structural evolution in bulk Sn electrode. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 22  Stable electrode structure of metal sulfides in ether-based electrolytes. Pulverization–tolerance effect: (a) schematic of structural evolution in CuS electrode. Reproduced from ref. 312 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (b) Schematic showing the mechanism of the pulverization–tolerance effect in copper sulfide anode. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. Stable electrode–electrolyte interaction: (c) structural evolution of ZnS in PC and TEGDME electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (d) Calculated binding energies between the CoS(222) slab model and DEGDME solvent (right) or EC solvent with two orientations (middle and left). Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 23  Debate of SEI on graphite in ether-based electrolytes. Missing SEI: (a) graphite electrode thickness change during cycling. (b) Selected OEMS mass signals during cycling. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. Electrochemical performance of graphite in (c) 1 M and (d) 2.5 M NaPF6–DEGDME electrolytes. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. Thin and robust SEI on graphite: (e) AFM force spectroscopy results of uncycled graphite electrode, and discharged state of graphite in ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes. (f) FT-IR analysis of discharged state in in ether-based electrolytes and carbonate-based electrolytes. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 24  Robust SEI on Sn anode. (a) AFM images of SEI formed in EC/DMC-based and DEGDME based electrolytes. (b) Distributions of Young's modulus and relative elastic regions of the SEIs in the two electrolytes. (c) In-depth XPS spectra of C1s, O1s and F1s of SEIs formed in the two electrolytes. (d) Schematic illustrating the compositions, structures and mechanical properties of SEI formed in EC/DMC-based and DEGDME based electrolytes. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 25  Rapid interfacial charge transfer in ether-based electrolytes. Absence of desolvation: (a) large energy consumption of desolvation process. (b) Charge transfer activation energy of desolvation and co-intercalation process in different electrolytes. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 318 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. Rapid interfacial kinetics: (c) in situ EIS curves of SnS anode in the discharged state in (c) DEGDME and (d) EC/DEC electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (e) Activation energies across the SEI (Ea,SEI) and charge transfer (Ea,ct) for the TiO2 anode in the DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes. (f) Comparison of the Ea,ct in the DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes for various electrode materials. (g) Atomic fractions of C, O, F, and Na as a function of SEI depth, calculated from the in-depth XPS spectra. (h) Schematic of the comparison of SEI compositions and charge transfer energy barriers in DEGDME and EC/DEC electrolytes. (e–h) reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of ionic conductive SEI in ether-based electrolytes. (a) Schematic illustration of the influence of different electrolytes on the SEI composition in metal selenide anode. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (b) Schematic illustration of SEI formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on Sn anode. (c) Schematic illustration of SEI structure formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on graphite anode. (b and c) reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of SEI structure and composition formed in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes on rGO anode. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of fast sodium storage kinetics in ether-based electrolytes compared to carbonate-based in hard carbon anode. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. Because of the multilayer structure with conductive organic species outside and inorganic species inside, and the thinner thickness, ether-derived SEI behaves more ionic conductive than carbonate-derived SEI and benefits fast sodium storage kinetics.	 

 	Fig. 27  Weak Na+-graphene interaction: (a) relative interaction energy, Ei, between single-layer graphene and metals or metal-solvent complexes. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. (b) Optimized structure of Li+–DEGDME and Na+–DEGDME complexes in graphene layers. Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. Na+ and Na+–DME complex migration energy changes (c) without and (d) with electric field. (e) Schematic of high-current working mechanism of graphite demonstrated by in situ synchrotron XRD during cycling at small and high current density. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Springer, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 28  Pseudocapacitance-dominant behavior (a) in Bi@graphite electrode in ether-based electrolytes proved by the CV curves and corresponding b-values of Bi@graphite, graphite and Bi electrodes at different scan rates. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (b) b-Value of hard carbon electrode in ether-based and carbonate-based electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. (c) Diffusion coefficients of Bi/C electrodes in DME and EC/DEC electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 300 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 29  Summary of the influencing relationship among electrolyte chemistry, SEI characteristics, electrode properties and battery performance.	 

 	Fig. 30  Perspectives on research directions of ether-based electrolytes for high-performance SIBs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
