Clean liquid fuels from direct coal liquefaction: chemistry, catalysis, technological status and challenges  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00097C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00097C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 311-345Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsClean liquid fuels from direct coal liquefaction: chemistry, catalysis, technological status and challenges

        
          
            Sivakumar 
            Vasireddy
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bryan 
            Morreale
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Anthony 
            Cugini
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chunshan 
            Song
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            James J. 
            Spivey
          
          
        
      *a
aCain Department of Chemical Engineering, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA. E-mail: jjspivey@lsu.edu;  Fax: +1-225-578-1476;   Tel: +1-225-747-3690
bNational Energy Technology Laboratory, Department of Energy, USA
cEMS Energy Institute and Department of Energy and Mineral Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Received 
      27th May 2010
    , Accepted 1st September 2010First published on 5th November 2010AbstractIncreased demand for liquid transportation fuels coupled with gradual depletion of oil reserves and volatile petroleum prices have recently renewed interest in coal-to-liquids (CTL) technologies. Large recoverable global coal reserves can provide liquid fuels and significantly reduce dependence on oil imports. Direct coal liquefaction (DCL) converts solid coal (H/C ratio ≈ 0.8) to liquid fuels (H/C ratio ≈ 2) by adding hydrogen at high temperature and pressures in the presence or absence of catalyst. This review provides a comprehensive literature survey of the coal structure, chemistry and catalysis involved in direct liquefaction of coal. This report also touches briefly on the historical development and current status of DCL technologies. Key issues, challenges involved in DCL process and directions for the future research are also addressed.Sivakumar VasireddyDr Sivakumar Vasireddy was born in 1976, Guntur, India and received his MSc in Chemistry from Andhra University, India in 1999. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India in 2007 under the guidance of Dr K. S. Rama Rao, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, India. He was a postdoctoral fellow in the groups of Prof. D. B. Tkatchenko, Universite de Bourgogne, France and Prof. James J Spivey, Louisiana State University, USA. He is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. W. Zmierczak's research group at University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA. His research interests include heterogeneous catalysis, catalyst characterization, syngas chemistry CO2 valorization and methane activation.Bryan MorrealeDr Bryan Morreale is the interim Materials Science and Engineering Focus Area Lead within the Office of Research and Development at the US DOE's National Energy Technology Laboratory. He currently leads activities across a diverse research portfolio related to both structural and functional materials for advanced energy conversion applications, specifically focused on advanced gasification, advanced combustion and minimizing environmental impacts. Dr Morreale is an alumnus of the University of Pittsburgh, where he received his PhD from the Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, with a research focus on the development of materials for hydrogen separation. Dr Morreale's tenure at NETL began in 1999, where he has had the opportunity to support the NETL Office of Research and Development as well as the NETL Strategic Center for Coal. Dr Morreale's research has focused on energy conversion and conservation technologies: specifically gasification, gas separations, membrane reactors, synthesis gas conversion, liquefaction and carbon utilization.Anthony CuginiDr Anthony Cugini is the Director of the US Department of Energy's (DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory with responsibility to oversee and manage all activities at the laboratory. He has been with NETL since 1987, during which time he created and directed the lab's Computational and Basic Sciences Focus Area from 2001–2007. He served as division director of the Fuels and Process Chemistry Division from 1999–2001. He has had a range of research interests over a wide cross-section of energy and environmental technologies, including the kinetics of exothermic reactions, catalyst development, advanced carbon synthesis, hydrogen production and separation, gas hydrates, CO2 sequestration and computational modeling.Chunshan SongDr Chunshan Song is a Distinguished Professor of Fuel Science in the Department of Energy and Mineral Engineering, a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Director of EMS Energy Institute at the Pennsylvania State University. His research interests include catalysis and adsorption for fuel processing, adsorption desulfurization and reforming of hydrocarbons and biofuels for fuel cells, shape-selective catalysis, CO2 capture and utilization, heavy oil upgrading, and conversion of coal and biomass to fuels and chemicals. He has 200 refereed publications, delivered 40 plenary or keynote lectures, and received Henry H. Storch Award in Fuel Chemistry from American Chemical Society.James J. SpiveyProf. Spivey is the Shivers 2 Professor of Chemical Engineering at Louisiana State University, and Director of LSU's Center for Atomic-level Catalyst Design, a Dept. of Energy Center which focuses on development of computational and experiment tools for heterogeneous catalysts. He also serves as Editor of the Catalysis book series (Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK) and is Associate Editor of Catalysis Today (Elsevier).

Broader context
The vast worldwide reserves of coal provide a significant incentive for the development of competitive processes to convert this resource into clean liquid fuels. Virtually all projections of energy usage show increasing demand for coal-based energy (e.g., Energy Information Administration/International Energy Outlook 2007). This is particularly true in the US and China, where coal is the dominant fossil energy resource. Among the proven processes to produce liquid fuels from coal, direct coal liquefaction (DCL) must be considered seriously in any strategic plan for coal utilization. DCL technology is essentially the catalytic hydrogenation of coal. The extremely complex and variable chemical and physical properties of coal make it difficult to understand the true fundamental processes that take place in a DCL process. Here, we examine these fundamentals, including catalytic chemistry, solvent effects, pretreatment, and reactor design, as well as challenges for the further development of DCL.

1. Introduction
The US light motor vehicle fleet consists of roughly 225 million cars/trucks consuming 9 million barrels of oil per day. This constitutes roughly 40% of the total US oil consumption of 21 million barrels per day, 12 million of which are imported. Despite being the third largest oil producer in the world, the US oil imports are expected to rise to 60% by 2025.1,2 For the foreseeable future, the world will continue to rely on petroleum-based liquid hydrocarbon fuels for transportation because of the extensive production and delivery infrastructure and the high energy densities of these fuels. The increasing demand for fuels, particularly by emerging economies, together with supply limitations and ongoing political and environmental issues make it imperative to develop economical, efficient, and sustainable alternatives for producing clean liquid transportation fuels and chemicals.
It would be beneficial to supplement petroleum-based liquid fuels with those from alternative sources, such as coal, natural gas, oil shale and biomass.3,4 The use of biomass/renewables is particularly interesting since this can help reduce net emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases. The amount of CO2 released per unit of energy in the final fuel is greater for coal than for petroleum refining,5 primarily because the complex chemical structure of coal requires hydrocracking of carbon–carbon bonds in its largely polymeric structure.6 If using biomass results in a net decrease in CO2 when proper accounting of all energy used to produce it is considered, there may be an incentive to liquefy coal/biomass mixtures to reduce the impact of DCL on CO2 emissions.
Coal and coal products will play an increasingly important role in fulfilling the energy needs of our society. Based on IEA 2008 report, coal accounts for about 26% of the total world primary energy consumption in 20067 and is one of the most attractive alternative sources of liquid fuels for the following reasons:8,9
(1) The amount of coal deposits estimated worldwide is ten times larger than that for the other carbonaceous resources.
(2) Coal resources are located more widely throughout the world than oil reserves, particularly in the countries such as US, China, India and Australia, which are currently relying on oil imports (Table 1).
Table 1 Countries with largest recoverable coal reserves (billion short tons)9




Country
Anthracite and bituminous
Lignite and subbituminous
Total




Australia
46.9
43.6
90.5


Canada
3.8
3.4
7.2


China
68.6
57.6
126.2


Germany
25.3
47.4
72.7


India
90.8
2.2
92.8


Poland
22.4
2.0
24.4


Russia
54.1
119
173.1


South Africa
54.6
—
54.6


UK
1.1
0.5
1.1


USA
126.8
146.8
273.6


Ukraine
17.9
19.7
37.6




(3) The technology for converting coal to liquid fuels already exists.
(4) Unlike alternative energy programs—hydrogen, solar, nuclear, wind, wave and biomass—liquid fuels from coal would not require extensive renewal of current energy infrastructures, e.g. they could flow through existing pipelines and be processed in existing refineries, before being input into existing petrochemical plants or distributed through infrastructure.
1.1 Direct vs. indirect liquefaction of coal
The term “coal-to-liquids” (CTL) refers to conversion of solid coal into liquid fuels and chemicals through either of two principle routes.10,11 Direct coal liquefaction (DCL) involves direct hydrogenation of coal at relatively high temperature and pressure whereas indirect coal liquefaction (ICL) begins with gasifying coal with oxygen and steam, then converting the gases (carbon monoxide and hydrogen) to liquids by processes such as Fischer–Tropsch synthesis. Commercial ICL production has been underway since 1950's in South Africa and was used throughout WW-II in Germany, along with DCL. CTL production in US is expected to be the largest potential contributor filling the oil import gap at 5.6 million barrels per day (20% of total US liquid fuels requirement) by 2030.12 These two fundamental CTL technologies have undergone continuous development for nearly eight decades and are deployed in commercial operations.
DCL is a reductive pyrolysis process in which coal (represented as CH0.8) is converted directly to liquids (–CH2–) by reaction with hydrogen. The overall reaction can be thought of as:nCH0.8 + xH2 → (–CH2–)nICL involves the reaction of coal with steam/oxygen to produce syngas (primarily CO + H2), which is then converted into liquids via the Fischer–Tropsch (F–T) reaction:CH0.8 + H2O/O2 → CO + H2 → (–CH2–) + H2O
A number of different studies have compared the two processes. Although it is not within the scope of the present review to analyze the two processes in detail, some general conclusions are as follows:
(1) DCL produces primarily cyclic hydrocarbons, whereas F–T produces primarily linear alkanes;13 some studies suggest that blending of the two products has advantages.13,14
(2) Overall system efficiencies are comparable if end-use as well as production efficiencies are taken into account.15
(3) Some fuels derived via ICL can outperform fuels derived from crude oil with regard to both air-pollutant and greenhouse-gas emissions, but DCL-derived synfuels cannot.15
(4) DCL costs, with continued R&D, are believed to be approximately the same as indirect liquefaction, but with 5–10% higher efficiency and correspondingly less production of CO2, when the two processes are compared directly.16
2. History and current status of direct liquefaction technologies
Direct liquefaction of coal was invented by Friedrich Bergius and patented in 1913, leading to the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1931. I. G. Farben developed the Bergius process in Germany in the 1930's17 and built 12 plants that provided liquid fuels during World War II. The direct liquefaction processes were inefficient and required very high pressure and high temperatures. The German liquefaction commercial plants were evaluated in the United States and other nations after the war, but the discovery of low price petroleum in Middle East in the 1950's stopped all coal liquefaction developments except in South Africa. With the oil crises in 1973 and 1978, the development of alternative technologies was renewed, particularly using coal as feedstock for fuels. Since then, many processes were developed for the direct liquefaction of coal which can conveniently be divided into two main groups.
Single stage processes
These processes were mainly developed from the mid-1960's to the early 1980's. This process gives distillates via one primary reactor or reactors in series operating under the same conditions.
• Kohleoel (Ruhrkohle, Germany)
• NEDOL (NEDO, Japan) (Pilot Plant operation late 1990's)
• H-Coal (HRI, USA)
• Exxon Donor Solvent (Exxon, USA)
• Solvent Refined Coal (SRC-I and SRC-II) (Gulf Oil, USA)
Two-stage processes
Two-stages DCL produces products via two reactor stages in series that operate under different conditions. The primary function of the first stage is coal dissolution and is operated either with a manufactured catalyst or with a low activity, iron-based disposable catalyst. The heavy coal liquids produced in the first stage are hydrocracked and hydrotreated in the 2nd stage reactor in the presence of high activity, albeit more expensive catalyst.
• Brown Coal Liquefaction (NEDO, Japan)
• Catalytic Two-stage Liquefaction (DOE, HTI, USA)
• Integrated Two-stage liquefaction (Lummus, USA)
• Liquid Solvent Extraction (British Coal Corporation, UK)
• Supercritical Gas Extraction (British Coal Corporation, UK)
A comparison of process conditions, oil yields and production capacity of different processes is shown in Table 2. SRC-II, EDS and H-coal processes were developed in the USA. These processes successfully demonstrated new technologies and laid the groundwork for future developments, but were unable to make coal liquefaction economically attractive. Although H-coal costs are not currently attractive, two developments promise reduced costs.18 First, a new catalyst with a bimodal pore size distribution was developed that improved distillable liquid yields, particularly with low-rank coals. Second, hydrogen consumption was lowered by using two reactors in series. An additional major development in the H-coal process was the use of an ebullated catalytic bed reactor (Fig. 1).
Table 2 Comparison of process parameters and yields of DCL technologies20,21




Process
Single stage DCL
Two-stage DCL


NEDOL
H-Coal
EDS
Kohleoel
BCL
CTSL
LSE




Scale/t d−1
150
200
250
200
50
1 Mt y−1
2.5


R&D step
Pilot
Pilot
Pilot
PDU pilot
Pilot
Commercial
Pilot


Reactor/catalyst
2–4% Fe
Co–Mo/Al2O3 and Ni–Mo/Al2O3
Noncatalytic
Fe catalyst (red mud)
Fe slurry Ca–Ni–Mo
Fe Gelcat-1st stage 2-stage ebullated reactor Ni–Mo/Al2O3
Noncatalytic (1st stage) ebullated-bed reactor (2nd stage)


Temperature, pressure
435–465 °C, 150–200 atm
435–465 °C, 200 atm
425–450 °C, 175 atm
470 °C, 300 atm
427–448 °C, 360–400 °C, 150–200 atm
430 °C 435–440 °C, 170 atm
410–440 °C, 10–20 atm; 400–440 °C, 200 atm


Yield (%)


Hydrocarbon gases (C1–C4)
16.9
10.5
5
19.0
13.6
—
15.4


Light oil (C5—200 °C)
28.8
13.3
14
25.3
36.7
60–65
49.9


Middle oil (200–325 °C)
19.3
19.7
10
32.6
15.1
—
12.4


Unreacted coal and pitch
18.8
37.1
48
22.1
8.1
7–22
24.7


Characteristic
Need upgrading
Reload catalyst during reaction




Using brown coal (moisture 60%)
First DCL plant






 Fig. 1  Ebullated catalytic bed reactor.19 
In this process, coal is slurried in the product liquid and fed into the reactor, where it is dissolved and upgraded in a single step. The ebullated bed makes it possible to use a conventional solid hydrotreating catalyst with a slurry feed. The H-coal process remained the basis of most subsequent process development sponsored by the US DOE and was effectively incorporated into the Catalytic Two-Stage Liquefaction (CTSL) process. The interest which has developed in staged liquefaction is due to the fact that optimum conditions for coal dissolution and coal liquids upgrading are different. It is most unlikely that a catalyst can be found which provides the myriad functions necessary to convert coals selectively to distillates in a single stage under a set of compromise conditions. Compared to the results obtained in single stage H-coal process, a two-stage catalytic liquefaction (CTSL) process leads to increased selectivity to distillates with low heteroatom content (Table 2).
In the United States, the Wilsonville 6 tons per day (tpd) and HRI (now Hydrocarbon Technologies Inc., HTI) 3 tpd (Fig. 2a) proof of concept facilities provided a significant database for two-stage operation. Several of these concepts used equipment similar to the one stage process and were evaluated at large pilot plant scale (>than 100 tpd). The NEDO brown coal process was demonstrated at a scale of 150 tpd of wet low rank coal, corresponding to about 50 tons per day of dry coal to the liquefaction unit. None of these two-stage processes have been commercialized due to low oil prices since mid-1990's.
 Fig. 2  (a) Process flow for catalytic two-stage direct liquefaction (CTSL) developed by HTI and DOE in USA. Source: Comolli and Zhou, DOE report under contract no. AC22-92PC92148, January 2000. (b) A flow diagram of the Shenhua Direct Coal Liquefaction plant, China. Source: X. Ren, Presented on Nov 2007 for IEA, http://www.iea.org/textbase/work/2007/neet_beijing/Renxiangkun_en.pdf. 
The only commercial DCL plant after World War II was built by the Shenhua Group, Inner Mongolia, China and began operating in December 2008 (Fig. 2b). The plant is designed to produce 778600 t y−1 of liquid fuels, 229800 t y−1 of naphtha and 101800 t y−1 of LPG.22 The characteristics of the Shenhua process include: (1) two ebullated reactors in series operated at around 450 °C; (2) nano-size iron catalyst prepared from Fe(SO)4; and (3) a hydrogenated recycle solvent for a higher hydrogen donor capability.22
3. Key benefits of DCL technology
Coal is abundant, low cost carbonaceous feedstock and DCL technologies can provide a high quality transportation fuels and a wide variety of chemical feedstocks. DCL technology provides an alternative pathway to liquid transportation fuels and chemicals in the face of depleting oil stocks and oil supply problems. DCL technologies have thermal efficiencies of ∼65 to 70% which are a significant advantage over those of indirect liquefaction (∼55%).20 Development of any coal-to-liquid process will enhance energy security and build a domestic synthetic fuels industry.
4. What is coal?
Coal is physically and chemically a heterogeneous copolymer which mainly consists of organic material made up of large, complex molecules containing mostly cross-linked aromatic ring structures plus varying amounts of inorganic and organically bound sulfur (<1 to 6%), nitrogen (<1 to 2%) and oxygen as structural components. Raw coal also contains moisture and solid particles of mineral matter.
4.1 Coalification and coal rank
The geochemical process that transforms plant material into coal is called coalification and the degree of maturation of coal is termed as coal rank. This may be illustrated as below:  
Chemically, these transformations can be viewed as combinations of deoxygenation, dehydrogenation, aromatization and oligomerization. The elemental composition of coal changes with increasing coal rank (Table 3).23,24 As the coal rank increases from peat to anthracite, the carbon content of the dry- and ash-free (DAF) coal increases from 60 wt% (peat) to 94 wt% (anthracite), whereas hydrogen content decreases from 6 wt% (peat) to 3 wt% (anthracite) and oxygen decreases from 34 wt% to 3 wt%. Changes in the concentrations of sulfur and nitrogen are less significant with coalification. The aromatic carbon content increases with coal rank from 0.5 (mol. fraction Carom in peat) to 0.98 (anthracite).
Table 3 Properties of coals of different ranks




 
Coal rank
Composition (wt%, DAFa)
Carom (mol. fraction)
Heat content (Btu per lb, DAF)




C
H
O





a DAF—dry and ash free.





Increasing pressure, temperature and time
Peat
60
6
34
0.5
—
Increasing aromatization and loss of oxygen 


Lignite
70
5
25
0.7
5500–8300


Subbituminous
75
5
20
0.78
8300–13 000


Bituminous
85
5
10
0.84
11 000–15 000


Anthracite
94
3
3
0.98
13 500–15 600




4.2 Coal structure
Coal is an almost non-volatile, insoluble, non-crystalline solid. It consists of an extremely complex mixture of organic molecules varying considerably in size and structure. A major limitation to understanding the process of liquefaction is the lack of realistic working model of coal structure. The design of the next generation of coal liquefaction processes will require a deeper understanding of coal's intrinsic properties and the ways in which it is chemically transformed under process conditions.25,26 Coal properties such as the chemical form of the organic material, the types and distribution of organics, and the nature of the pore structure must be determined for coals of different ranks in order to use each coal type most effectively.
There are two approaches to determine the chemical structure of coal. One is the degradation of coal macromolecules into fragments which are more easily characterized and then determining the original structure based on the fragments and conditions of fragmentation. A second approach is to characterize the coal directly by using non-destructive techniques such as IR, NMR, TEM, XRD, XPS and XAS.27 One goal of this work is to relate the product slate and conditions of liquefaction to the original chemical structure of the coal.

4.2.1 Organic structure. 
The organic portion of coal consists predominantly of polycyclic aromatic, hydroaromatic, and heterocyclic clusters joined by short aliphatic and ether linkages into a cross-linked three dimensional network. The aromatic rings are substituted with alkyl side chains and phenolic hydroxyl and ether groups. Many molecular models representative of the organic material in a coal of a specific rank have been reported and continue to be proposed.8,27–32 These structures must be used with caution because they are only representative of a general structure of a coal with respect to aromaticity, bridging groups, heteroaromatic species, and elemental analyses but are not actual coal structures.
Bituminous coals consist of highly substituted, cyclical carbon structures of one or more (∼3 to 5) condensed rings that are bound to each other by alkyl or ether bridges (oxygen or sulfur) to form a macromolecular network. Low-rank coals contain a higher proportion of oxygen groups (Fig. 3).11 The relative sizes of the structural units, bridges, and substituents vary depending on the coal rank. With increasing rank, progressively fewer functional groups are present and the ring system becomes more polycondensed33 as shown in Fig. 3. The average size of the aromatic units does not vary significantly over most of the coal ranks, but is found to be markedly higher for anthracite coals.34
 Fig. 3  Coal rank vs. oxygen functional groups and aromaticity. 
In 1984, Shinn proposed a more complex reactive model of coal structure based on detailed chemical analyses of both coal and products obtained from liquefaction processes in terms of aromaticity, functional groups and reactivity.30 The model considers the mobile phase in coal, the aliphatic constituents, the two-stage liquefaction yields, the three dimensional nature of coal, its maceral chemistry (the organic constituents of coal), the pyrolysis products, and the gasification reaction chemistry. Shinn's model of a vitrinite-rich high-volatile bituminous coal with molecular formula C661H561N4O74S6 (mol. wt. = 10023) is shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Model of bituminous coal structure.30 

Table 4 shows the principle oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur functional groups present in the organic fraction of coal. The principal oxygen functional groups in bituminous coals are presented as phenolic or etheric groups with lesser amounts of carboxylic acids or esters along with carbonyls,35 while lignite and subbituminous coals contain carboxylic groups predominately. Hence ionic bonds between the carboxylic groups and di- and trivalent metals, in particular calcium, magnesium, and iron, are considered to contribute to the cross-linking in such low rank coals.
Table 4 Heteroatom functional groups present in coala




Oxygen
Nitrogen
Sulfur





a Ar: aromatic; R and R′: aliphatic hydrocarbons.























Thiols



R–S–H aliphatic


R–S–R′ aliphatic









Sulfides



Ar–S–R and Ar–S–Ar aromatic


R–S–S–R′ aliphatic



Disulfides



Ar–S–S–R and Ar–S–S–Ar aromatic









Thiophenes



R–O–R





R–(CO)–R


R–COOR




Nitrogen and sulfur are mainly located in heterocyclic compounds. Organic sulfur in coal can occur as four basic types of structure: thiols, sulfides, disulfides and thiophenes.36 In the last decade, major advances have been made in speciating and quantifying forms of organically bound sulfur involving both reactive and direct measurements.37 Reactive methods such as flash pyrolysis38 and direct methods such as X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy and sulfur K-edge X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES) were used for the characterization of organically bound sulfur forms in Argonne premium coals.39 It was concluded that in low-rank coals there are significant amounts of aliphatic sulfur (dialkyl sulfides) and that levels of aromatic sulfur (thiophenes and diaryl sulfides) increase directly as a function of increasing rank.40,41
The organically bound nitrogen in coals was analyzed by XPS and nitrogen K-edge XANES.37 Pyrrolic nitrogen was found to be the most abundant form of organically bound nitrogen for fresh Argonne premium coals followed by pyridinic and quaternary types.37 In low rank coals, quaternary nitrogen is more abundant. The concentrations of this form decrease while pyridinic or basic nitrogen forms appear to increase correspondingly as a function of increasing rank. The quaternary species were attributed to pyridinic or basic nitrogen species protonated by associated hydroxyl groups from carboxylic acids or phenols.42


4.2.2 Inorganic structure. 
The inorganic constituents or mineral matter present in coal originate from inorganic elements that associate with living matter, detrital minerals deposited during the time of peat formation and dissolved salts present in ground water that precipitate or otherwise deposit in coal seams.43,44 Most high grade coals contain ∼10 wt% of mineral matter, although the amounts vary considerably (up to 30 wt%).45 The common minerals associated with bituminous coals are presented in Table 5.23
Table 5 Mineral matter associated with bituminous coals




Group
Species
Formula




Shale
Muscovite
(K,Na,H3O,Ca)2(Al,Mg,Fe,Ti)4


Hydromuscovite
(Al,Si)8O20(OH,F)4


Illite
(HO)4K2(Si6,Al2)Al4O20


Bravaisite




Montmorillonite
Na2(Al,Mg)Si4O10(OH)2


Kaolin
Kaolinite
Al2(Si2O5)(OH)4


Livesite




Metalloysite




Sulfide
Pyrite
FeS2


Marcasite




Carbonate
Ankerite




Ankeritic calcite
(Ca,Mg,Fe,Mn)CO3


Ankeritic dolomite




Ankeritic chalybite




Chloride
Sylvite
KCl


Halite
NaCl


Oxides
Quartz
SiO2


Hematite
Fe2O3




Mineral matter is a mixture of inorganics, and depending on the deposition conditions, many elements exist in coals in their original oxidation states or chemically reduced states. Iron, for example, is usually found as pyrite rather than ferric sulfate. Mineral matter is not same as the ash, and the terms should not be used interchangeably. The coal ash is inorganic residue (mixture of complex oxides formed by oxidation of mineral matter) resulting from the combustion of coal.46 Mineral matter is not necessarily inert during liquefaction and can affect the product distribution and yields. It has been reported to act beneficially as a catalyst (pyrite and clay) for coal liquefaction and detrimentally as a catalyst poisons, and can form scale on the walls of, or deposits in, liquefaction reactors.31,47


4.2.3 Physical structure. 
The physical structure of coal, like its chemical structure, can govern properties such as hardness, compressibility, extractability, diffusion and mass transport. Among various aspects related to physical structure, porosity is particularly relevant to direct coal liquefaction. Determination of surface areas as well as pore volumes is needed in order to establish correlations between surface area and chemical reactivity, particularly regarding the access of gases and liquids to the interior of a coal particle. Coals of rank ranging from lignite to anthracite have been reported to possess a complex pore system consisting of macro- (>50 nm), meso- (2–50 nm) and micropores (<2 nm).48,49 The contribution of macropores to the total pore volume decreases, while meso- and micropore contributions increase with increasing coal rank.49 Most of the total surface area of the coal is associated with micro- and mesopore surfaces. The degree of interconnection of micropore network in its natural state is still largely unknown. Conclusions range from a mostly non-interconnected pore network50 to a mostly interconnected pore network.51 In connected micropores, the transport mechanism involves activated surface diffusion as molecules interact with the surfaces of the pore walls. Larsen et al. were the first to emphasize the importance of another transport mechanism for coal by analogy with glassy polymer systems.50 Diffusivity is expected to drop significantly across the glassy space of the coal matrix.52 This transport mechanism will increase in importance as the degree of interconnection of the pore system of coal decreases.


4.2.4 Macromolecular structure of coal. 
As noted previously, the models of coals do not fully describe the chemical structure of coal, so that an “average” molecule is inappropriate to represent the molecular and structure diversity of coals.53 It is generally agreed that coal has a network structure since coals absorb solvents and fluids, causing swelling. In this way, coal behaves like a macromolecular gel having elastomeric properties,31,54 through which the fluid is able to diffuse as a dissolved molecule. A review of the molecular structure and chemistry of coal was reported by Davidson.55,56
Two kinds of network structures have been proposed: non-associative (covalent) and associative (non-covalent) network structures (Fig. 5).57,58 A composite model of combining associated and non-associated models are more probable (Fig. 5).59 Non-associative coal macromolecular structure (two phase) was proposed based on the observation of slow and rapid 1H relaxation rates in NMR experiments. In this view, the covalently cross-linked three dimensional macromolecular network of the coal substance forms the ‘immobile phase’ and is host to a multitude of relatively small embedded ‘guest’ molecules of varying structures, which is known as the ‘mobile phase’.60–62
 Fig. 5  Non-associated (left), associated (middle) and combined (right) molecular network structures.59 
On the other hand, irreversible, thermal and cooperative effects observed in swelling63,64 and extraction studies65,66 were considered not to be compatible with this model and this led to the realization that, in addition to covalent bonds, non-covalent associative interactions also contribute to the cohesiveness of the organic material of the coal. The physically associated model of coal network structure was proposed as an alternative to the macromolecular model. In the physically associated model, non-covalent bonding forces provide the basis for structural integrity of the coal.58 These non-covalent bonding forces include ionic forces, hydrogen bonding (primarily due to –OH), aromatic–aromatic (π–π) and charge transfer interactions.57,67,68

1H NMR studies measuring the secondary moment of the frequency spectrum as an indicator of molecular mobility were used to understand the effect of heat and solvent on network mobility, which was expressed as the ratio of second moments as a function of coal rank.69,70 These studies reveal that both heat and solvent (pyridine) treatments are almost equally effective in increasing network mobility in coals with up to ∼86 wt% of carbon, at which point thermal treatment becomes much more effective. Solvent extraction studies with mixture of solvents, pyridine and carbon disulfide (CS2), show that the effect on the mobility of the network was identical to that of thermal treatment, regardless of the carbon content of the coal.71 These results suggest that non-covalent associative bonding is important and its contribution increases as coal rank and aromaticity increase. Based on the experimental results, Aida et al. proposed a coal structure model and the relative distribution of bonding interactions to be responsible for forming the cross-linking network structure in coal.72 Evidence to date suggests that the model of two phase (host–guest) macromolecular network of coal structure may be valid for lignite and brown coals,73 and non-covalently associative network model is better fit for bituminous coals. Probably the true figure lies somewhere between the two models, where the proportion of covalent and non-covalent network junction depends on the type of coal.74 It has also been suggested that the network structure may consist of entangled chains.75 In the combined structure coal consists of a distribution of various sized molecules (small to very large macromolecules) in associated (secondary interactions) and entangled chains.
Pioneering work on exploring coal molecular structure by means of computer aided molecular design (CAMD) was done by Carlson.76 He studied van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonding in the formation and stabilization of coal macromolecular structure using four 3D models of molecular structures as reported by Given,28 Wiser,77 Solomon78 and Shinn.30 He observed that van der Waals interactions were responsible for most of the stabilization in coal and that the relative importance of van der Waals interactions increased with increasing coal rank. CAMD calculations of coal model molecules suggest the importance of noncovalent bond energy. Sanada and references therein pointed out the crucial parameters in network structure of coal as follows:79 (1) covalent crosslink bonds (>50 kcal mol−1 in strength) act as point interactions, (2) reversible cross-links that can be disrupted at high temperature or by appropriate exchange reactions and solvent swelling, and (3) hydrogen bonds (∼5 kcal mol−1) act to hold together molecules in a persistent associated form. Multiple bonds with such cooperative interactions are formed in the macromolecular structure and are estimated at 20 kcal mol−1 or more. That fact means that coal molecules do not exist in the gas phase without thermal decomposition.
The structures discussed so far have served to represent structural information and, in some cases, an associated behavior; however, none of the structures have been applied to multiple processes. The small scale restricts the representation to an “average” molecule with a limited extent to structural diversity. The Shinn model stands out because of the model scale and rationale for structure diversity as related to liquefaction studies. However, to date, there is no model representing meaningful molecular weight distribution in coals. Most recently Narkiewicz and Mathews reported an improved network structure (Fig. 6) of low-volatile bituminous coal (Pocahontas No. 3) that contains 22151 atoms with 215 separate molecular entities, ranging between 78 and 3286 amu, creating a diverse molecular weight distribution to accurately represent the intricacy of the coal structure.80
 Fig. 6  Molecular representation of Pocahontas No. 3 coal proposed by Narkiewicz and Mathews.80 
This model fits well with respect to the H/C ratio, helium density, elemental analysis, average aromatic rings per cluster and general chemical constitution as well as illustrating diversity through molecular weight distribution and orientation anisotropy. Because of the large, molecularly diverse structure, the application of this model for many coal behavioral processes should extend much further.

5. Direct coal liquefaction

Fig. 7 shows a comparison of the H/C mole ratio for coal and a number of other natural hydrocarbon resources in comparison with that of petroleum.35,81 The conversion of coal (H/C ≈ 0.8) into liquid fuels (H/C ≈ 2.0) requires the addition of hydrogen or rejection of carbon (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  H/C ratios of various hydrocarbon sources. 
The aim of direct coal liquefaction (Fig. 2) is to break down the complex coal structure into smaller component molecules which then can be further refined into clean liquid fuel products by removing heteroatoms including sulfur- and nitrogen-containing compounds.8,81,82 Direct coal liquefaction generally involves the addition of hydrogen to a slurry of ground coal in a process derived solvent (recycled oil) under pressures of 15–30 MPa and temperatures of ∼400 to 450 °C in the presence or absence of manufactured or disposable dispersed catalysts to produce liquids that are suitable for further upgrading to specification fuels. Hydrogen can be added directly to the coal–oil slurry in a liquefaction reactor in the presence of a hydrogenation catalyst or added indirectly using an “H-donor solvent”, such as tetrahydronaphthalene (tetralin). At the temperatures and pressures noted above, coal is believed to be substantially dissolved. Rapid heating of up to several hundred degrees per minute is believed to be essential to high oil yields and prevention of retrogressive reactions, which also occur under these conditions. Hydrogen donor solvents play an important role in suppressing the retrogressive reactions at this stage by capping radical moieties and preventing recombination reactions. The amount of hydrogen consumed from solvent is directly related to the heating rate. The crude liquid product is then separated by distillation from solids containing coal residue, mineral matter and catalyst. In the next stage, the liquid is further treated in the vapor phase with the hydrogen over fixed bed catalysts, where thermal and catalytic cracking, hydrogenation and hydrocracking reactions take place to produce fuels of various specifications. A certain fraction of crude liquid is recycled to prepare the coal slurry after an optional hydrogenation step. Although direct coal liquefaction (eqn (1)) is slightly exothermic, the overall process efficiency suffers because hydrogen must be produced by a separate process. CH0.8S0.2O0.1N0.01 + xH2 → CH2 + CO2, H2S, NH3, H2O(1)
5.1 Fundamental transformations in direct coal liquefaction
Prior to liquefaction, coal is often washed to remove bulk inorganic materials and dried. This process sometimes changes the structure and assemblage of coal macromolecules83–85 in low rank coals. Scheme 1 shows a general reaction model for direct coal liquefaction.86,87 It shows a general scheme that conceptually illustrates the sequential, parallel and retrogressive reactions encountered during direct liquefaction. Direct liquefaction proceeds through two loosely defined stages, dissolution or primary liquefaction in the first stage and upgrading of primary products in the second stage to produce liquids that are like synthetic crude oils. Primary liquefaction involves thermal fragmentation (TF) of coal macromolecular structure to produce free radicals which are capped by hydrogen. This hydrogen donation (HD) may be by hydroaromatic solvents, other hydrogen donating species in the coal, in vehicle solvents, and by gas phase H2. The primary liquefaction step produces preasphaltenes, asphaltenes and oil along with C1–C4 hydrocarbons and inorganic gases such as ammonia and hydrogen sulfide. Preasphaltene and asphaltene are often called “liquefied” products because they are coal fragments soluble in certain solvents but they are, in fact, solids at ambient temperatures. The incorporation of PRIOM (promptly repolymerized insoluble organic materials) in the reaction scheme is conceptually very important, especially for early stage coal liquefaction because retrogressive reactions can occur to a significant extent.
 Scheme 1  Reaction model for coal liquefaction. TF: thermal fragmentation; HD: hydrogen donation by hydrogen in coal, vehicle and gas-phase H2; PreAsp: preasphaltenes; Asp: asphaltenes; PRIOM: promptly re-crosslinked or repolymerized insoluble organic materials; Oil: oils are hexane- or pentane-soluble products including light distillates. 
In summary, the main fundamental steps that are necessary to transform coal to gasoline and distillates via direct liquefaction82,88,89 are:
(1) coal dissolution (disintegration or dispersion of coal macromolecules),
(2) reduction of molecular size to allow access to catalyst pores,
(3) removal of heteroatoms such as N, O and S,
(4) hydrogenation of aromatic rings and ring opening of saturated rings,
(5) reduction of molecular size to 5–20 carbon atoms and
(6) increase in the atomic H/C ratio to about 2:1.
On the other hand, undesired side reactions89 comprise
(1) retrogressive reactions (Section 5.2 below),
(2) dehydrogenation of hydroaromatic hydrocarbons,
(3) condensation of polar materials on catalyst surfaces (deactivation),
(4) removal of side chains from aromatic and saturated rings (gas formation) and
(5) hydrogenation of aromatics (decrease of solvent quality and loss of hydrogen).
5.2 Coal dissolution, depolymerization and retrogressive reactions
Coal liquefaction is the breakdown of macromolecules into smaller hydrocarbon molecules that are distillable. The first step in the liquefaction is the formation of liquid phase by fusing small molecules of coal at above 350 °C. Some macromolecules may be dissolved in this liquid phase (fusion and dissolution mechanisms).
Uncatalyzed liquefaction is a pyrolytic process; the bridges linking the cyclical units are ruptured when heated to 400–450 °C. Ether linkages are cleaved first90–92 and then methylene bridges.93–95 In the early stages of liquefaction, phenolic hydroxyl groups are apparently lost more slowly than ether oxygen.96 Organic sulfur and oxygen are lost at similar rates.81,96 Spontaneous thermal scission or homolysis of bonds liberates radicals, which can be capped by the abstraction of H-atoms from the donor molecule, leading to the formation of low molecular weight molecules that are dispersed in the solvent. If hydrogen capture does not occur, the radicals can repolymerize or recombine in simple coupling reactions or initiate a more complex series of radical reactions to form stable high molecular weight products [the formation and classes of coal free radicals are discussed in Section 5.3]. These reactions and a small part of hydrogen terminate the thermal fragments/other reactions that produce the tetrahydrofuran insoluble (THFI) fractions are the so-called retrogressive reactions. It is well recognized that retrogressive reactions occur to some extent during liquefaction and that they have negative impact on the liquid yield.97,98 In recent years, it has been proposed that oxygen functional groups (i.e. carboxylic acids, ethers, and phenols) prevalent in low rank coals are major contributors to retrogressive products by cross-linking reactions that inhibit efficient thermochemical processing of low rank coals to liquid fuels. The repolymerization or recombination reactions between free radicals, between coal molecules, or between coal molecules and free radicals are termed as cross-linking reactions.
Ca2+ cations lead to poor liquid yields in pyrolysis or liquefaction processes.99–102 Serio et al. demonstrated that this was due to the cross-linking reactions caused by the decomposition of oxygen functional groups.102 On the other hand, the oil yield was successfully increased by demineralization,103 solvent swelling101,104 or alkylation of coal.105–107 These results suggest that the secondary interactions such as cation linkage and hydrogen bonding are related to the retrogressive reactions. Temperature programmed liquefaction studies done by Saini et al.108 and Song et al.109 concluded that benzyl-type radicals can lead to retrogressive reactions. These reactions can be induced by the decomposition of oxygen functional groups and condensation of the polyhydroxyl structure. Studies of the cross-linking reactions of oxygen functional groups using model compounds showed that decarboxylation of benzoic acids with the evolution of CO2 results in products that are susceptible to subsequent electrophilic coupling reactions.110–113 These reactions can also form anhydrides that restrict the access of solvent and catalyst, further promoting cross-linking reactions. In related study using aromatic carboxylic acids at temperatures of 325 and 425 °C, Eskay et al. concluded that decarboxylation of free carboxylic acids may not necessarily lead to low temperature retrogressive reaction in low rank coals.114
According to conventional view of coal liquefaction, retrogressive reactions in nonpolar systems result primarily from recombination of radical species (Scheme 2).115–118
 Scheme 2  Recombination of phenoxy radical through carbon with a benzyl radical leading to benzyl phenol. 
This mechanism (Scheme 2) appears not to be a facile reaction in homogeneous model systems involving two or four ring aromatic systems. Radical addition and displacement reactions on aromatic systems become more facile as the size of the ring system increases (Scheme 3). Thermochemical estimates and numerical modeling studies by McMillen and Malhotra118 indicate that at least some of the following factors will typically be necessary for retrogressive reactions:
 Scheme 3  Radical displacement reactions leading to retrogressive products.118 
(1) aromatic clusters, which are particularly susceptible to radical addition,
(2) the presence of readily displaceable radical fragments, and
(3) the presence of aromatic systems or steady-state radical concentrations that are capable of rapid bimolecular reaction with the unstable retrogressive adducts to further accept a hydrogen and stabilize the retrogressive adduct.
Iino et al. examined the change in the CS2–NMP (N-methyl pyrrolidine) insoluble fractions as a function of heat treatment at low temperatures using the coal solubilized by CS2–NMP.119 This approach is thought to be quantitative, but only the amount of the fraction insoluble in CS2–NMP was monitored. The retrogressive reactions were also examined by monitoring the change in the tetrahydrofuran soluble (THFS) fraction of coal oxidized with nitric acid.98 It was concluded that two types of retrogressive reactions occurred during the liquefaction: cross-linking by decomposition of the oxygen functional groups present in the THFS fractions at low temperatures and the recombination/repolymerization of the unit structure in the tetrahydrofuran insoluble (THFI) fractions at above 360 °C.
Wang et al. studied cross-linking reactions of oxygen groups during liquefaction of lignite by (a) monitoring THF-insoluble solid products formed after liquefaction of coal that was oxidized in nitric acid at 70 °C and dissolved in THF and (b) using added model compounds such as benzyl alcohol.120 The addition of benzyl alcohol to oxidized coal is designed to determine the effect of benzyl-type ether oxygen groups on cross-linking reactions. At temperatures below 300 °C, cross-linking reactions convert THFS fractions into cross-linked solid products. When the temperature increases, induced cross-linking reactions between large molecular fragments derived from decomposition of oxidized coal and cross-linked solid products take place. This can be due to the decomposition of benzylic C–O bonds in benzyl alcohol (C6H5CH2OH) to form benzyl and OH radicals, which consume H radicals and other free radicals, leaving few H radicals available to be donated. This leads to more retrogressive products.
The retrogressive reactions at low temperatures can be suppressed by selecting the proper solvent based on its physicochemical properties, such as solubility parameter and vapor pressure, in addition to the hydrogen donating ability. A desirable donor solvent capable of a high degree of contact with the coal surface can limit retrogressive reactions by donating hydrogen to the nascent radicals.
5.3 Free radicals in coal liquefaction
It is widely accepted that coal liquefaction involves free radicals as the key reactive intermediates. This view is supported by general observation that free radical reactions control the pyrolysis chemistry of most organic substances. General kinetic features of coal liquefaction have also been used to support this view. However, because of the chemical complexity of coal, structural and kinetic properties of these radicals cannot be directly obtained from experiments on coal itself. The use of “model” experiments and predictive theory was proposed by Stein121 and Poutsma.122 Coal-derived free radicals were divided into classes based on their reactivity. The probable behavior of each class of radicals in coal conversion chemistry was examined by assuming that (a) coal is composed of randomly oriented, substituted, hydroaromatic clusters linked by covalent bonds (biphenyl, methylene, ether, etc.);81 (b) free radical reactions account for all covalent bond breaking and forming processes; (c) all varieties of free radical reactions important in coal conversion are well known;123 and (d) steric and diffusional effects do not influence reaction kinetics.

5.3.1 Elementary free radical reactions relevant to coal conversion. 
Before classifying radicals according to their reactivity, the general qualities of each type of elementary reaction encountered in free radical kinetics will be discussed here.
(a) Homolysis of a covalent bond will produce two radicals (eqn (2)). Generally at coal liquefaction temperatures (375–450 °C) bonds with strengths greater than ∼65 kcal mol−1 will not undergo appreciable homolysis and bonds weaker than ∼50 kcal mol−1 will homolyze during heating to reaction temperature. This implies that only C–C and C–O bonds are susceptible to rapid homolysis forming resonance stabilized radicals. (2)
(b) A single bond positioned β to a radical center undergoes scission to produce an unsaturated molecule and a smaller radical (eqn (3)). Their reversal, radical combination, and addition constitute important bond-making processes. (3)
(c) Free radical isomerization reactions more often proceed through cyclic transition states in which a radical center located β to an aromatic ring attacks the ring (neophyl rearrangement) (eqn (4)). In β-scission reactions, ejection of an alkyl radical is more favored over H˙ and a more stable alkyl radical is more favored over a less stable alkyl radical. (4)
(d) H-Atom transfer may proceed through H˙ as a discrete intermediate. More commonly, the hydrogen atom is transferred directly from a donor to an acceptor. Hydrogen abstraction involves a molecular donor and a radical acceptor while radical disproportionation involves radicals as both donor and acceptor. Radicals with weak β-H bonds (≤50 kcal mol−1) may transfer H-atoms to another radical in parallel with recombination. When both donor and acceptor are spin-paired molecules, hydrogen transfer by molecular disproportionation can produce two radicals by the microscopic reversal of radical disproportionation.124 In the absence of severe steric effects, virtually all organic radicals are expected to recombine and this is dominant form of radical termination at low temperatures. At higher temperatures, however, recombination generally becomes reversible.
(e) Radical addition to unsaturated structures typically occurs in parallel with H-atom abstraction.
A critically important feature of many addition reactions in coal chemistry is their high degree of reversibility. At temperatures of coal conversion, re-dissociation of many radical/molecule adducts is very rapid, so for addition to be effective these adducts must undergo rapid irreversible reactions.


5.3.2 Classes of free radicals. 
Stein classified the free radicals that encountered in coal processes into two groups: (a) highly reactive radicals, which consists of H˙, OH˙, Ar˙ and alkyl radicals and (b) reactive delocalized radicals.121 The types of highly reactive and delocalized radicals are summarized in Tables 6 and 7 respectively. Highly reactive radicals consist of H, C, and O radicals that do not possess resonance stabilization energy and are known to be highly reactive in radical–molecule reactions. These highly reactive radicals are selectively formed under milder conditions (T ≤ 425 °C), through the energy derived from degradation of a highly unstable structure into a stable structure. At higher temperatures, a wider range of formation mechanisms become feasible, particularly involving endothermic bimolecular reactions.
Table 6 Highly reactive radicals: formation and reactions121




R

D(R–H)
Formation
Reactions




H˙
104.2











Ḣ + RH → H2 + Ṙ


OH˙
112



ȮH + RH → H2O + Ṙ


Ar˙
112, 106













Alkyl˙
90–100
R˙ + alkyl H → alkyl˙ + RH
Isomerization, β-bond scission




Table 7 Reactive delocalized radicals121




(A) Keq(2R˙ ⇌ R2) ≫ 1


(1) Benzylic, no weak β-bonds





(2) Benzylic, weak β-bonds


(a) Weak β-H bonds


R–H = olefin—not convertible to polyaromatic





R–H = olefin—convertible to polyaromatic





R–H = polyaromatic





(a) Weak β-C bonds





(3) Phenoxylic, no weak β-bonds





(4) Phenoxylic, weak β-bonds





(5) Sulfur centered





(B) Keq(2Ṙ ⇌ R2) ≲ 1


(1) Triarylmethyl and ortho-substituted diphenylmethyl radicals





(2) Blocked phenoxylic





(3) Phenalenylic







H-Atoms appear to be the most important class of highly reactive radicals in coal conversion. Because of lower entropies and enthalpies of activation in their reactions, H-atoms react far more rapidly with molecules; as a result they serve as propagation agents in chain reactions. OH˙ radicals are the most likely intermediates in a free radical mechanism for water formation. OH˙ radicals may be readily generated by displacement of phenolic hydroxyl groups by H-atoms.125 Aryl radicals are the most reactive of all common hydrocarbon radicals and the formation of these radicals under liquefaction conditions requires selective pathways as in eqn (5). (5)
Alkyl radicals are intermediate in stability between aryl and benzylic radicals. Alkyl radicals are not thought to dominate coal chemistry, because of the relative difficulty of forming these radicals compared to benzylic radicals.
Radicals with resonance stability resulting from odd-electron delocalization are expected to constitute a very large fraction of the free radicals in coal reactions. These radicals are stable enough to be readily formed in the 350–450 °C range, yet reactive enough to play a major role in the overall chemistry. These radicals are divided according to whether recombination products are stable or unstable. The former variety of radicals is subdivided into (1) benzylic without β-bonds; (2) benzylic with weak β-bonds; (3) phenoxylic without weak β-bonds; (4) phenoxylic with weak β-bonds; and (5) sulfur centered. The later variety can be divided into (1) triarylmethyl and crowded diphenylmethyl; (2) blocked phenoxylic; and (3) phenolenylic.
Another class of radicals detected from ESR studies appears to be inert. Kuhn et al.126 attributed these radicals to unreactive neutral radicals which are prevented from abstracting H-atoms by complete shielding of the radical center, as might be the case for the known radical shown below:  
In addition, highly stable radical ions may also account for a large fraction of the observed ESR signals in coal systems.127

5.4 Nonradical reactions
While most discussions have focused attention on the dominant free radical processes that take place during the thermal decomposition of coal molecules during coal liquefaction, it is apparent that pericyclic reactions can make a major contribution to the degradation reactions of the complex molecules under appropriate conditions. There are a variety of plausible pericyclic reactions that must be considered in the development of an adequate theory for the noncatalytic thermal reactions of coal molecules. Moreover, these processes are important under the more severe reaction conditions of coal liquefaction at temperatures in excess of 500 °C. The reactions include the unimolecular transfer of hydrogen from one hydrocarbon to another hydrocarbon molecule (eqn (6)). (6)
Importance of pericyclic reactions for carbon–carbon bond cleavage remains a matter of controversy. Virk has advanced the view that retroene reactions and related processes are important in the decomposition reactions of hydrocarbons at the threshold temperature of liquefaction, 400 °C.128 Study of rates and products of decomposition of 1,2-diphenylethane, 1,3-diphenylpropane, and 1,4-diphenylbutane reveals that retroene reactions are insignificant for the formation of reaction products. Hung and Stock proposed that such pericyclic processes may be indirectly responsible for the initiation of free radical chain reactions.129 Other pericyclic reactions such as the decarbonylation of phenolic aromatic compounds and the fragmentation of tetralin apparently are too slow to be important under the conventional conditions used in liquefaction reactions.
6 Factors effecting coal liquefaction
6.1 Coal pretreatment

6.1.1 Effect of preheat treatment. 
Pretreatment of coal before liquefaction was found to be an effective means to increase coal liquefaction efficiency through a net reduction of retrogressive reactions which, at the mild operating conditions of liquefaction, improves process economics. The first type of pretreatment methods is heat treatment.25,130–132 The low temperature treatment could allow time both for solvent penetration and hydrogen transfer. Preheat treatment at 200 °C130 and 277–322 °C131 has been shown to increase conversions for the noncatalytic liquefaction of bituminous coals. Preheat treatment at 350 °C gave high liquid yields for the catalytic hydroliquefaction of subbituminous and bituminous coals.132 Inukai et al. studied the effect of in situ preheat treatment at 250, 350 and 400 °C, followed by catalytic and noncatalytic liquefaction of Wandoan and Illinois No. 6 coals at 450 °C.133 The two-stage liquefaction with in situ preheat treatment for 15 min gave higher yields of toluene solubles and hexane solubles compared to single stage liquefaction at 450 °C without preheat treatment. Fig. 8 shows the effect of preheat treatment on Wyodak subbituminous coal at 275 and 350 °C compared to results with single stage liquefaction in the presence of catalyst and solvent.134 The improvement in liquefaction behavior of coal that is pretreated at 350 °C appears to be due to loss of the carboxyl functional groups usually responsible for crosslinking without the associated crosslink formation.
 Fig. 8  Comparing product distributions for no preliquefaction with preliquefaction at 275 °C and at 350 °C followed by liquefaction at 425 °C.134Liquefaction conditions: 425 °C, catalyst—Mo, solvent—naphthalene, H2 atmosphere, 10 min. Preliquefaction conditions: catalyst—Mo, solvent—naphthalene, H2, 30 min at 275 °C, 60 min at 350 °C. 
One approach to match the rate of hydrogenation with the rate of free radical formation is to slow the rate of free radical formation by controlling the reaction temperature appropriately, rather than by using high hydrogen donor solvent to prevent retrogressive reactions.135 In single stage liquefaction (SSL) only one reaction temperature is used. According to the heating rate, single stage liquefaction can be further classified as slow heat up SSL, where the reactants are slowly heated from ambient conditions to the desired reaction temperature, and fast heat up SSL, where the reactants are heated to reaction temperature in a very short time, usually less than 5 min. In temperature staged (TSL) and temperature programmed liquefaction (TPL), two temperature levels are involved. The low temperature (usually between 200 and 350 °C) is designed for pretreatment and the high temperature (between 400 and 500 °C) for liquefaction. In TSL, the reactants are immediately heated to the higher temperature and in TPL there is a slow heat up (30 min or longer) between the two temperature stages. The reactions at the lower temperature and during the heat up period in TPL are designed for transformation of the catalyst precursor into an active catalyst and penetration of the solvent into coal particles to achieve good solvent–coal contact. Chemical effects of TPL include reduction of the rate of thermal cracking of the coal structure, which might be too fast at high temperature and lead to retrogressive reactions. Although SSL is the simplest procedure, it may cause problems, especially for low rank coals, because of different kinds of bonds that may be initially broken at the higher reaction temperatures, some so rapidly that hydrogenation is too slow to cap the radicals formed and their coupling reactions reduce liquefaction yields. Other bonds may be broken so slowly that reactions may not occur to significant extent during the reaction time. Indeed, several researchers suggest that conversions and yields of low distillate products can be improved by using TSL rather than SSL.109,135–137


6.1.2 Effect of hydrothermal treatment. 
Hydrothermal treatment of coal is one of the important pretreatment methods. It may not only enhance the reactivity of coal, but can also change the solvent extraction and pyrolysis properties of the treated coal and hence promote hydroliquefaction of the coal. Graff and Brandes et al. reported that the pyridine extraction yields of Illinois No. 6 coal increased from 17% for the raw coal to 30% by treatment in steam at 50 atm and 340–500 °C, although the extraction yields decreased to the levels of raw coal after the treated sample was exposed to air for minutes.138,139 On the basis of the results of analyses performed on raw and steam-pretreated coal, it was concluded that during hydrothermal (steam) pretreatment new hydroxyl groups are introduced.138 As a result, the covalent cross-links in coal are greatly reduced, yielding a partially depolymerized coal. Such depolymerized coal is, potentially, an improved feedstock for coal liquefaction.
Bienkowski et al. found that the conversion of toluene solubles of Wyodak coal in liquefaction at 400 °C increased from 27.3 to 38.4% by steam treatment at 200 °C.140 Ivanenko et al. showed steam pretreatment substantially improves the quality of liquid product in coal slurry liquefaction and the oil yield is doubled under low severity conditions.141 The benefits of steam pretreatment can be realized only if the pretreated coal is then rapidly heated to liquefaction temperature. This is necessary, so that the pretreated coal can pass quickly through the temperature region where retrogressive effects occur. The pretreated coal must also be protected from oxygen to preserve the benefits of pretreatment. Iino et al. also found that water treatment of Argonne premium coals at 327 °C increased the extraction yields greatly with CS2/NMP mixed solvent.142 However, water treatment at 227 °C and treatment of coal without water at 327 °C gave only a slight increase in the yields.
Several mechanisms have been proposed for the enhancements of extraction and liquefaction yields after hydrothermal treatment of coal. For example, the rupture of weak covalent bonds, such as ether bonds,143 the breaking of hydrogen bonds,140 loosening of π–π interactions and breaking of hydrogen bonds,142 the removal of minerals by sulfuric acids formed during the treatment with H2O144 and the decrease in oxygen functional groups,145 which are thought to be responsible for cross-linking reactions, have been proposed. The suppression of metal carboxylate-induced retrogressive reactions in liquefaction by the association of metal cations with water,146,147 and the effect of dihydroxy aromatics formed by water treatment and their reactions with coal were also considered.143,147 Khan et al.148 and Ross and Hirschon149 believed that water treatment gives no benefits. Shui et al. reported that hydrothermal treatment at proper conditions can increase the extraction yields of bituminous coals, especially for higher ranks of coal.150 This was attributed to the decrease of total oxygen and hydroxyl oxygen during treatment catalyzed by water, which can act more effectively as an acid or a basic catalyst. The hydrogen bonds in macromolecular network of coal are broken because loss of oxygen and hydroxyl oxygen leads to the formation of smaller molecules. These molecules are immediately solvated by water and are stabilized by incipient hydrogen obtainable either through the interplay of carbon and water, or from water alone.


6.1.3 Effect of drying and oxidation. 
Particularly for the low rank coals, pretreatment by drying can improve the liquid yields. Because direct liquefaction conversion and kinetics are heavily dependent upon the partial pressure of hydrogen in the liquefaction reactor, the removal of moisture in the coal allows the partial pressure of hydrogen to be increased without increasing the total operating pressure.151 Eliminating the partial pressure of the steam in the reactor increases the partial pressure of hydrogen and other gaseous components if the reactor pressure is held constant.
In addition, removal of water from the coal prior to liquefaction reduces the cost of both separating water from the coal and wastewater treatment. A drying process, with minimal effect on the reactivity of coal, is important in coal liquefaction.152–154 For thermal liquefaction (i.e. reaction without added catalyst), several groups have examined the effects of drying or oxidation on coal conversion.152–155 Some studies have shown that drying of coal has negative impact on its reactivity,153–155 while there is also evidence to the contrary in non-catalytic liquefaction.152
Drying of coal can cause an irreversible change in the pore structure such as collapse of pores,156 which could limit the accessibility of the reacting components during liquefaction and thus limit the rate of reaction. Oxidative drying has a detrimental effect on the coal conversion.153–155 The negative impact of severe oxidation on coal liquefaction is thought to arise from the significantly increased oxygen functionality which enhances the cross-linking reactions in the initial stages of liquefaction. Song et al. examined the effect of non-oxidative drying and drying in the presence of air (mild oxidation) at 100–150 °C on catalytic and non-catalytic liquefaction of Wyodak subbituminous coal at 350 °C.157 For thermal liquefaction, fresh raw coals gave higher conversion and higher oil yield than the dried coals, regardless of the solvent. In the case of catalytic liquefaction, the absence of solvent shows a negative effect on the liquefaction of vacuum or air dried coals compared to raw coals and in the presence of either tetralin or 1-methylnaphthalene. Coal dried in air shows no apparent negative effect and vacuum dried coal shows better conversion and oil yields. Miknis et al. studied the effect of different drying methods on liquefaction behaviors of six coals of ranks from lignite to high volatile bituminous. The coals were treated by thermal drying, microwave drying and chemical drying using 2,2-dimethoxypropane (DMP) before liquefaction at 425 °C using 2:1 weight ratio of tetralin to coal.151 Thermal- and microwave-drying appeared to collapse pore structure, and prevent donor solvents from reaching reactive sites inside the coals. This led to lower conversions and lower liquid yields (in the case of low rank coals) compared to pre-moisturized coals. Chemically dried coals show high conversions (up to 18%) and liquid yields (low rank coals) between 11 and 60% greater suggesting that pore structure did not collapse.


6.1.4 Effect of coal swelling in solvents. 
Organic solvents in contact with coal often become incorporated in the structure and swell the coal. The degree of swelling depends on solvent chemistry and coal rank. Subsequent liquefaction of solvent swollen coals has shown improved conversion and product quality.158–163 It is postulated that solvent swelling of a coal selectively disrupts hydrogen bonds and increases the mobility of small molecules associated with the macromolecular network of the coal.162 Solvent swelling may facilitate self-donation reactions of indigenous hydrogen, and suppress the initial retrogressive reactions while enhancing reactivity. Improved contact of coal with liquefaction solvents increases the liquefaction efficiency and reduces the severity of liquefaction conditions by improving mass transfer and reaction rates. Solvent swelling may cause coal molecules to be dissociated, rearranged, and re-associated in lower free energy conformations.164 Swelling may also break weaker non-covalent bonds, forming more active reaction sites and increasing macropores in the coal structure. Increased porosity would increase diffusion165 and may also facilitate the roles of catalysts.166 Recently, Shui et al. examined the effects of pre-swelling in Chinese subbituminous coals on their solvent extraction and liquefaction efficiency. The influence of the presence of a swelling solvent in the coal on its liquefaction has also been studied (Table 8).163
Table 8 Effect of swelling pretreatment on the liquefaction conversion and liquefied product distribution of Shenhua coal (ref. 163)a




 
Conversion (%)
Oil + gas (%)
Asphaltene (%)
Preasphaltene (%)





a TOL(+) and TOL(−) are the toluene swollen coals in the presence of and after removing toluene, respoectively, and same for NMP and THN.





Raw coal
55.5
20.8
12.0
22.8


TOL(+)
57.4
23.4
12.0
22.1


TOL(−)
61.8
24.1
11.4
26.3


THN(+)
59.1
10.6
13.2
35.2


THN(−)
64.6
23.8
13.7
27.1


NMP(+)
61.2
4.1
16.4
40.7


NMP(−)
64.9
18.3
15.0
31.6




Pre-swelling consists of treating the coal with a solvent such as toluene, which swells the coal before liquefaction. The pre-swollen coal was tested in two ways: (a) removing the solvent before liquefaction and (b) not removing the solvent. These studies show that pre-swelling treatment increases the liquefaction conversion because it disrupts some noncovalent interactions of the coal molecules, relaxes the network structure, and produces a less aggregated structure in the swollen coal, facilitating diffusion of the hydrogen donor solvent into the coal structure during liquefaction. This improves the internal hydrogen donation ability of the hydrogen-rich species in the coal. Removing the swelling solvent before liquefaction increased conversion compared with coals from which the swelling solvent was not removed (Table 8). If the swelling solvent remains in the coal it may retard the diffusion of hydrogen donor solvent into the macromolecular network of coal because of strong interactions between the swelling solvents and the active cites of the coal molecules. It would thus delay the H transfer to the radical fragments and decrease the liquefaction conversion. The swelling solvent may also affect the dispersion of catalysts on the surface of coal pores.
Pretreating the coal by demineralization or by using chemical methods such as alkylation,167 acylation,168 in the presence of CO/CO–H2O/CO–H2–H2O,169 by adding peroxides170 or dissolution with strong acids or bases171,172 also shows improvement in the coal conversion.

6.2 Effect of coal rank
The behavior of coal during liquefaction is usually governed by rank, petrographic composition and inorganic constituents.173 The macerals of the vitrinite group, which constitutes >80 vol% of the organic content of most coals and of the liptinite group are generally accepted to be the much more reactive in liquefaction than the inertinite macerals.174,175 However, coal rank is the most crucial parameter for liquefaction. The influence of rank on the conversion of a series of British coals using solvent extraction in a poor H-donor solvent is shown in Fig. 9.176,177
 Fig. 9  Dependence of conversion on coal rank.176 *dmmf = dry, mineral-matter free. 

Fig. 10 shows the dependence of yields of distillate oil and vacuum bottoms on the oxygen and carbon content of the coal.178 Syncrude yield exhibits a maximum near the transition of brown coal to bituminous coal (80–85% carbon). Between 87 and 89% ‘C’ (medium volatile bituminous coals), the oil yield decreases sharply and high rank coals of >90% ‘C’ (low volatile bituminous and anthracite) are mostly inert.
 Fig. 10  Dependence of liquefaction yields on coal rank (carbon and oxygen content).89,178 Pressure—30 Mpa, temperature—465 to 470 °C; 4% minerals in feed coals, ■ and ●—carbon content; □ and ○—oxygen content; DAF—dry and ash free. 
The hydrogen exchange reactions between tritium labeled gaseous hydrogen and three different ranks of coal, Datong coal (bituminous coal), Wandoan coal (subbituminous coal) and Morwell brown coal (brown coal), were examined to estimate the hydrogen mobility under coal liquefaction conditions by Kabe et al.179 The hydrogen exchange reaction between these three coals and gaseous hydrogen proceeded even at 300 °C and increases rapidly with temperature from 350 to 400 °C. The hydrogen exchange ratio increased in the order of Datong ≈ Wandoan < Morwell. The yields of coal liquids increase with temperature and decrease with coal rank (Fig. 11). The rate of liquefaction decreased in the order of Morwell > Wandoan > Datong, which shows that coals with higher carbon content are more difficult to liquefy.
 Fig. 11  Effect of coal rank on liquefaction yields of residue and SRC at different temperatures.179 Datong—● and ▲; Wandoan—◑ and ; Morwell—○ and △; residue—●, ◑ and ○; SRC—▲,  and △. Reaction time 2 h. 
Lower rank coals require an additional H2 source to attain high conversion levels. Low rank coals, lignites, brown coals and subbituminous coals liquefy more readily; however, hydrocarbon yield is limited because of the increasing oxygen content, which forms water and carbon oxides.178 Also, the liquefaction of low rank coals has caused pumping difficulties because of high viscosity of the residual products. This problem can be prevented by increasing the liquefaction residence time180 or by adding disposable catalysts. The presence of Ca (e.g., as humic acid salts) accounts up to 3 wt% in low rank coals. Ca converts to CaO during liquefaction and reacts with CO2, leading to the deposition of CaCO3 on the reactor walls. This is one reason that low rank coals are not attractive feedstocks for liquefaction. Although the total liquid yield tends to decrease with decreasing rank, the fraction of low boiling distillates increases.181 The subbituminous coal products are more volatile, contain more saturated hydrocarbons, are less aromatic, and have higher hydrogen content and fewer heteroatoms.
6.3 Effect of solvents
In addition to coal rank, solvent quality is an important factor in coal liquefaction. The solvent plays two very important roles in coal liquefaction: (1) physically, it serves as a medium for coal transport and heat transfer; and (2) chemically, it serves as an important source of transferable hydrogen (hydrogen donation) and as a transport vehicle for hydrogen within coal (hydrogen shuttling).122,182 The solvents that are the most effective in such hydrogen donation (H-donors) are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and their partially hydrogenated, aromatic homologs, such as tetralin and 9,10-dihydroanthracene, 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene and 4,5-dihydropyrene. Solvents with two or more aromatic rings, such as methylnaphthalene, dissolve a larger amount of coal than those with aliphatic structures because coal mainly consists of condensed aromatic structures. H-Atoms can be readily abstracted from hydroaromatic compounds and cap the coal free radicals. H-Donation activity of the solvent is related to the degree of saturation and to the number of condensed rings.11 Naphthenic solvents such as decalin (decahydronaphthalene, a completely saturated PAH) are poor H-donors or coal solvents compared to partially hydrogenated compounds (e.g., tetrahydronaphthalene).90,153 Pyrene has been reported as an excellent solvent to dissolve coal into quinoline soluble fractions under liquefaction conditions.183 Some PAHs (e.g., pyrene) can abstract hydrogens from the donor solvent or by transfer of a labile hydrogen from coal, in situ during the liquefaction process, forming a new donor (4,5-dihydropyrene) of higher reactivity.8,81,184 By repeated hydrogenation/dehydrogenation cycles, PAHs can act as “H-shuttlers” between radicals and molecular hydrogen, which itself competes in the stabilization of the radicals only at high pressures. Derbyshire et al. reported that pyrene acts as an excellent hydrogen shuttler to give a higher conversion to THF-soluble product in liquefaction with tetralin alone.185
Combinations of certain solvents act synergistically, e.g. mixtures of tetralin and pyrene.185 This suggests that mixtures of aromatic and partially hydrogenated aromatic solvents should be evaluated as donor solvents. In addition, solvent blends, e.g., distillate with non-distillate, can offer advantages to coal conversion because of improved hydrogen transfer or physical solvation.185,186 The partitioning of solvent components between vapor and liquid phase may strongly affect the degree to which they can contact other liquid and solid reactants (coal and catalyst). In flow reactors, the stripping of lower boiling fractions by the gas stream will lead to reduced residence time of these fractions relative to the high boiling fractions. By reducing the boiling range of the recycle solvent in a continuous reactor, the residence time of the high boiling fraction was selectively increased, leading to an increased oil yield.
Most processes use liquefaction products (process derived oil) as a solvent. These coal derived solvents are highly complex mixtures of compounds, some of which (e.g., heterocyclic nitrogen and phenolic oxygen compounds) can influence liquefaction beneficially or detrimentally.11 Much research has been devoted to the reactions of various solvents with coals to identify those products that improve liquefaction so that they can be selectively separated for recycle or generated in an additional process stage. Severe coal liquefaction conditions can cause solvents to undergo side reactions such as isomerization, cracking, polymerization and incorporation in coal liquefaction products. The resulting losses can lead to solvent imbalance.11,122,187
Many attempts have been made to clarify hydrogen transfer mechanisms during liquefaction in the presence of solvents. These mechanisms are important because they affect yields and rates of reaction and include hydrogenation and hydrocracking of coal, with hydrogen in the gas phase and solvent and whose source may be the solvent or transfer from the gas phase or the coal molecule. In the traditional view of the liquefaction,188 inherently weak bonds in coal undergo homolysis upon heating, and the solvent merely serves to stabilize these thermally generated radicals (Scheme 4). The solvent is not involved in bond scission.
 Scheme 4  Conventional mechanism: H-donor solvent stabilizes thermally generated radicals.189 
This model is insufficient to explain all of the known facts;190,191 for example:
- The relative effectiveness of H-donors does not correspond to their ability to scavenge radicals.
For example, among the common donor solvents, dihydroanthracene is the most efficient radical scavenger, and yet it is recognized to be a poorer liquefaction solvent than a number of other hydroaromatics. It is also noted that solvents such as indane and ethylbenzene which have C–H bonds as weak as tetralin and are equally effective radical scavengers are much less effective than tetralin as liquefaction solvents.
- The normal range of operating temperatures for coal liquefaction is too low for the thermolysis of strong bonds, such as those in Ar–CH2–Ar linkages.
Liquefaction studies with coal model compounds (donor solvents, 400 °C, 1 h) revealed that even strong Caryl–Calkyl bonds undergo cleavage. Simple thermolysis of this bond type will proceed with a half-life of no less than 106 years and should be wholly unobservable under the experimental conditions.
- High hydrogen pressures are relatively ineffective.
- Three- and four-ring polycyclic aromatics are better liquefaction solvents than two-ring aromatics.
McMillen and coworkers proposed an alternative model for bond scission in coal liquefaction whereby solvent mediated hydrogenolysis (SMH) of strong bonds with varying degrees of effectiveness takes place (Scheme 5).189,192 They also reported that weak bonds also undergo thermolysis to the extent that there are weak bonds in the coal. However, the critical factor that determines the efficacy of various solvent systems is evidently their H-transfer ability, which results in cleavage of strong bonds.
 Scheme 5  Solvent mediated hydrogenolysis: solvent engenders bond scission.189 
Mochida et al. reported that this mechanism, followed by Scheme 4, enhances gas formation through the thermolysis and coking reactions, especially when the amount of donor is insufficient.193 The lower, first stage temperature of two-stage liquefaction may be insufficient to break strong bonds in coal macromolecules. In the second, higher-temperature stage, where mechanism shown in Scheme 5 takes place, the stronger bonds of asphaltene may be cleaved. Gas formation remains low, because the reaction takes place only after the hydrogenation at the alkylated aromatic carbons.

6.3.1 Hydrogen transfer mechanisms. 
There are several pathways by which solvent systems could transfer hydrogen atoms to critical linkages. The system could either generate free H-atoms that add to the ipso positions [dihydroaromatics could transfer H-atoms in a reverse radical disproportionation (RRD) reaction] or solvent derived radicals could transfer H-atoms to closed shell species in a radical hydrogen transfer (RHT) bimolecular step.189 Competition between cleavage resulting from RHT and that resulting from RRD depend on the reaction conditions and determine the efficiency of the hydrogen utilization and product distribution.189,192Scheme 6 shows that donor solvent coal liquefaction results from a bimolecular transfer of hydrogen (RHT) from cyclohexadienyl-type radicals (of either coal or solvent origin) to the ipso positions of linkages to aromatic systems in coal structure.
 Scheme 6  Cleavage of strong bonds engendered by H transfer to ipso position.194 
Malhotra and McMillen investigated the hydrogen transfer mechanisms using dinaphthylmethane as a surrogate for the cleavage of strong bonds in coal liquefaction induced by a combination of competing hydrogen transfer processes, chief among which are RHT and free H-atom addition.189 The main conclusion drawn from their numerical modeling studies is that different H-transfer pathways are competitive. In all PAH solvent systems, cleavage by RHT is favored with higher aromatic content of the solvent and lower temperatures. At low concentrations, cleavage by the addition of free H-atoms will dominate.
Because the RHT mechanism is bimolecular, the solvent must be able to penetrate the coal structure while the coal is still solid. Alternatively, the mechanism can operate using coal radicals produced by thermolysis, some of which may be mobile within the coal particles. In this case, the reactions will be limited by the amount of hydrogen available within the coal unless there is an external source. Donor solvent-derived hydrogen may be able to enter the coal structure even if the solvent cannot. It is known that hydrogen can readily exchange between coal, hydroaromatics, and polycondensed aromatics. The equilibration of H-atoms between donor solvent species and aromatic coal structures could augment the quantity of hydrogen available in the coal and propagate cleavage either by free H-atoms or RHT.
A related mechanism was proposed by Hei et al. to explain their experimental data for the H2S promoted cracking of model compounds.195 In this instance, the radical species SxH attaches to the ipso position to affect cleavage. The species is so designated because of uncertainty about the number of sulfur atoms and the presence of hydrogen. Thus if H2S is present in the system it may compete with hydrogen induced bond cleavage. It may also provide a source of H-atoms by reactions (7) and (8): R˙ + H2S → RH + ˙SH(7) ˙SH + H2 → H2S + H˙(8)


6.3.2 Catalyst mediated hydrogen transfer. 
According to conventional theory on DCL, catalysts promote hydrogen transfer molecular hydrogen to solvent and then from solvent to coal; that is the solvent acts as a shuttle for transferring hydrogen from molecular hydrogen to coal, and the activated hydrogen coming from hydrogen donation solvents can cleave some of the strong C–C bonds.196–198 Hydrogen atoms are produced by the dissociative adsorption of molecular hydrogen at the surface of catalyst particles. The catalyst sites can serve as centers from which H-atoms can migrate into the coal by transfer between aromatic structures (Scheme 7). Their concentration will be determined by the rate at which they are removed by addition to aromatic ring systems and by subsequent abstraction of H from alkyl- and hydroaromatics. The addition of a solvent can help in the transmission of H-atoms, generated at catalyst sites, to the coal. The effectiveness of hydrogen distribution by this means will be determined by the solvent composition and will be accelerated when a significant concentration of H-shuttlers (polycondensed aromatics) is present. The H-atoms produced by catalytic dissociation will increase the pool of available hydrogen within coal or the coal–solvent system and will be available for aromatic hydrogenation, the promotion of bond cleavage reactions, and radical stabilization.84,199–203
 Scheme 7  Catalyst mediated hydrogen transfer model in coal liquefaction.198 
Molecular hydrogen can also influence the course of thermal C–C bond cleavage reactions by competing with donor hydrogen. Vernon studied C–C bond cleavage in the reaction of model compounds such as bibenzyl (C6H5CH2)2 and biphenyl (C6H5)2 at 450 °C in the presence of tetralin, hydrogen or a mixture of these compounds.92 Toluene is produced by a thermal cracking reaction in which the rate-controlling step is the cleavage of the β-bond in (C6H5CH2)2. Benzene and ethylbenzene are produced by a hydrocracking reaction. The rate of the hydrocracking reaction is directly proportional to the hydrogen pressure. The strong bond in biphenyl is hydrocracked in a system containing both molecular hydrogen and a source of free radicals. These studies on model coal structures offer firm evidence that molecular hydrogen can participate directly in free radical reactions under coal liquefaction conditions. Under some conditions molecular hydrogen can compete with a donor solvent to stabilize the thermally produced free radicals. Molecular hydrogen can also promote some hydrocracking reactions in coal liquefaction that do not occur to an appreciable extent in the presence of only donor.
Many other researchers also suggest that, in the presence of catalyst and pressurized hydrogen, the main hydrogen transfer occurs directly from molecular hydrogen to coal rather than via hydrogen donation solvents,204–206 and that the role of the solvent is to provide good dissolution of coal rather than as a “hydrogen shuttle”.207 Tritium and 14C tracer methods were also used to elucidate the hydrogen transfer mechanism in DCL.208 It should be noted that no general consensus for the role of the catalyst and the hydrogen transfer mechanism in DCL has been reached.

7 Catalysis in direct coal liquefaction
Coal liquefaction can occur in the absence of an added catalyst, especially in the processes developed in the USA such as SRC-I, SRC-II and Exxon Donor Solvent (EDS). These processes utilize iron species present in the ash of a coal and hydrogen donor solvent to enhance the reaction but the use of added catalysts increases the overall efficiency of the process (e.g. NEDOL). These catalysts can also help reduce investment and operational costs by reducing the severity of reaction conditions and residence times. Several recent reviews of catalyst developments are available.8,83,89,209
Catalysis in liquefaction accelerates the reactions of hydrogenation, cracking, hydrocracking and heteroatom removal.209–211 Because coal contains a large variety of species and functionalities, representative intermediates should be well characterized at each step of liquefaction to clarify their adsorption and reactivity over the catalyst surface. Reactive species for hydrogenation can be radicals, olefins and aromatic rings of various sizes with alkyl substituents. Cracking involves aromatic dealkylation and the cleavage of C–C bonds in paraffins, methylene linkages and naphthene rings. Selective hydrocracking of naphthenic ring is also possible.212
An efficient coal liquefaction catalyst would maintain contact with solid coal, high hydrogen transfer activity, display high activity for cracking and hydrocracking of C–C bonds and be either very low cost or be readily recovered and recycled.
The addition of catalyst has been shown to simply increase the rates of the reaction pathways defined by the thermal processes, as would be expected.213 These thermal liquefaction pathways of bituminous and subbituminous coals were found to be very different from each other.213 Formation of preasphaltenes and asphaltenes increases with increase in bituminous coal conversion initially. After attaining maximum conversion, the coal and the intermediates get converted to oil and gases. In the case of two-stage liquefaction of subbituminous coals, preasphaltenes + asphaltenes and oil + gases are produced simultaneously with increases in coal conversion in the first stage of the liquefaction. In the 2nd-stage, coal conversion increases moderately towards the formation of oil and gases.
7.1 Dissolution catalysts
Catalysts may be either metal or metal compounds dispersed in the coal–solvent slurry or as supported metals and metal compounds in ebullated- or fixed bed reactors. Generally the former catalysts are used to promote coal dissolution, whereas the latter are mainly applied to upgrade the coal-derived liquids. Although many catalysts have been examined in fundamental studies, large scale investigations have been primarily concerned with metal sulfides and acid catalysts. The sulfides of metals Fe and Mo are believed to function as hydrogenation catalysts while acidic metal halides like ZnCl2 promote bond cleavage by an ionic mechanism. In both cases, effective control of the dissolution process requires intimate contact between catalyst and coal. Since catalyst recovery is almost impossible from the solid reaction products, only low cost disposable catalysts are practical. The development of technologies for catalyst recovery could alleviate this problem and broadens the choice of catalyst selection.

7.1.1 Fe-based catalysts. 
The most conventional catalytic material used since the Bergius process has been iron sulfide because of its moderate price and relatively high activity. Several developments have been aimed at increasing the efficiency of iron-based dissolution catalysts as cheap, environmentally benign, and disposable. Three general strategies for Fe catalysts development are: (a) enhancement of catalyst dispersion by preparing ultrafine powders of nanocrystalline iron oxides and sulfides with diameters <100 nm, (b) enhancement of catalyst activity by adding low concentrations of other metals to iron; and (c) enhancement of dispersion and improvement of the contact between catalyst and coal by impregnating coal particles with soluble catalyst precursors.89
(i) Nanometre particle catalysts. 
Most iron catalysts used are in powdered form. Since their particle sizes strongly influence the liquefaction activity, finer powders are preferred. Natural products are extensively ground to reach less than 1 µm in diameter. Ultrafine powders of iron oxides and sulfides have been prepared by means of vapor phase hydrolysis of volatile compounds (FeCl3) in a hydrogen–oxygen flame to produce nanoiron oxide (aerosol) with spherical shaped particles of sizes around 50 nm.214 The performance of aerosol iron oxides in coal liquefaction largely exceeds that of red mud and compare favorably with commercial supported Ni–Mo catalyst. The activities of these catalysts can be improved by incorporation of small amounts of Mo. Sulfidation of aerosol Fe2O3 by adding elemental sulfur during pyrolysis produced catalysts that showed high activity for the liquefaction of high volatile bituminous coal.215 The results show a doubling of the total conversion from 25% to 52%. Laser pyrolysis of Fe(CO)5 and C2H4 was used for the production of ultrafine particles of iron carbides followed by in situ sulfiding.216 The laser pyrolysis technique has been used successfully by researchers at University of Kentucky to produce a variety of iron based ultrafine particles including two phases of iron carbide (Fe3C and Fe7C3), two phases of iron nitride (Fe3N and Fe4N), an iron sulfide (Fe1−xS) and α-Fe. All of these particles were in the range of 4–20 nm in size217,218 and showed only moderate liquefaction activity for subbituminous coals. Precipitation/crystallization sequence from the sulfates and oxyhydroxides of iron219 and a chemical reduction or an exchange/replacement reaction of iron salts solubilized in reverse micelles of reaction media was used to produce these materials.220
Researchers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory developed techniques for generating ultrafine-powder, iron-based catalysts in large quantities using flow-through techniques termed Rapid Thermal Decomposition of Solutions (RTDS) and Modified Reverse Micelle (MRM) processes.221 In RTDS, precursors are exposed briefly to conditions of high temperature and high pressure to initiate nucleation of iron oxide and hydroxide. In MRM high loadings of iron-bearing salts in water-in-oil micro-emulsions are precipitated by changing the conditions of the microemulsions. MRM and RTDS generated iron-bearing powders were evaluated as catalyst precursors for selective C–C bond scission using the model compound naphthylbibenzylmethane (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Coal liquefaction catalyst testing model compound, naphthylbibenzylmethane. 
Results of model compound tests designed to evaluate the relative activities of the various RTDS and MRM iron-bearing precursor powders are presented in Table 9. At the reaction conditions used for this investigation (1 h at 400 °C in 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene), and with no sulfur or catalyst precursor added, almost none of the model compound was converted into products. Using no catalyst precursor, but adding elemental sulfur to the test vessel, the amount of model compound consumed increased to as much as 10%, suggesting that sulfur alone may act to some extent as an agent for decomposition of the model compound or, more likely, that it reacted and produced a compound that was not analyzed.
Table 9 Model compound test results: nanometre-scale powders produced using MRM and RTDS techniques (ref. 221)a





a 
Test conditions: 25 mg of model compound (naphthylbibenzylmethane), 10 mg of elemental sulfur, 100 mg of 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene, 10 mg of catalyst precursor powder, 400 °C, 1 h in sealed tube.
b Cleavage of the a and b bonds as a percentage of total bonds cleaved.
c Consumptions measured to be greater than 90% were outside the calibration curve for the GC and are thus simply reported as >90%.





Catalyst sample no.
Identified phase(s)
Model compd consumed (%) (±4%)
Bond cleavage selectivityb (%) (±3%)


No catalyst


<5
40–60


Sulfur only


<20
50–70



RTDS products



62-79-4
Hematite
23
83


54-53-5
2-Line ferrihydrite
20
84


54-50-3
Hematite/6-line ferrihydrite
81
96


48-20-1
6-Line ferrihydrite
90
96


48-19-7
6-Line ferrihydrite
>90c
96


54-54-2
Magnetite
>90
98


54-56-1
Ferric oxyhydroxysulfate
>90
94


54-56-4
Ferric oxyhydroxysulfate
>90
96



MRM products



MRM-7-2
2-Line ferrihydrite
51
91


MRM-39-39
2-Line ferrihydrite
41
90


MRM-7-2A
Magnetite/maghemite
77
89


MRM-39-39A
Maghemite
32
92


MRM-39-39
Goethite/lepidocrocite
44
93




The RTDS and MRM processes provide two novel techniques for the production of ultrafine iron-based powders suitable for use as C–C bond scission catalysts. The phase of the catalyst precursor is important to the activity of the catalyst at reaction conditions. Ultrafine RTDS-generated powders consisting of the six-line ferrihydrite, magnetite, and ferric oxyhydroxysulfate phase all exhibited a high degree of activity as precursors to C–C bond scission catalysts using the model compound, naphthylbibenzylmethane, in the presence of elemental sulfur and 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene at 400 °C reaction temperature. MRM magnetite/maghemite also exhibited enhanced activity relative to bulk magnetite and maghemite produced by conventional synthesis methods, but residual surfactant present in the MRM powders, the presence of other noncatalytic phases, or even poor catalyst geometry resulting from the extremely fine crystallite size in these powders may have inhibited catalytic activity.
(ii) Highly dispersed catalysts. 
Oxide and sulfide catalysts have been dispersed by physically mixing powders or suspensions of catalysts with coal. The dispersion can be enhanced by impregnating coal particles with water- or oil-soluble iron precursors such as naphthenate salts and carbonyls or ion exchanged onto the coal surface through the interaction with oxygen functional groups.222–226 The results of some studies indicate that, even with soluble precursors, quite large crystallites or agglomerates can be formed during liquefaction and hence potentially high dispersion is not maintained.216
The use of an incipient wetness technique/deposition precipitation to impregnate the coal with Fe3+ from an aqueous solution has been shown to give high dispersion of the catalyst precursor on a coal substrate.222 The coal matrix may also aid in maintaining the high dispersion subsequent to activation.227 Guin et al. studied the catalytic activity of nanoscale dispersed iron oxyhydroxide on four different coals and several model compounds.228 The catalysts were reduced in H2 and sulfide prior to liquefaction. For every coal tested, the addition of the nanoiron oxyhydroxide catalyst increased the yield of pentane soluble and THF soluble products. Model compound studies show that the H2 reduced form of the catalyst showed excellent aromatic ring hydrogenation activity.
A procedure yielding a very small particle size iron catalyst (FeOOH) for coal liquefaction has been developed at the US Department of Energy.227 Incipient wetness is used to impregnate coal with an aqueous solution of ferric nitrate, which is subsequently converted to FeOOH by the addition of NH4OH. Results with no added iron, powder and impregnate catalysts are shown in Fig. 13. At a catalyst loading of 2500 ppm the precipitated FeOOH yielded the same catalytic activity as 1000 ppm molybdenum, added as ammonium heptamolybdate for the liquefaction of an Illinois No. 6 coal. The dispersion and activation conditions used for iron catalyst precursors have a large effect on the activity of the resulting iron catalysts. Impregnated catalysts show high activity compared to powder forms. The same trend was observed from the work reported by same researchers later (Table 10).229 In the absence of a carbonaceous support, the transformation of FeOOH to iron sulfide results in a loss of surface area, possibly due to agglomeration. The presence of a carbonaceous support for FeOOH tends to mitigate particle size growth and favors the formation of smaller particle-sized iron sulfide catalysts that are likely to have high specific surface areas.229
 Fig. 13  Effect of catalysts on coal conversion. Microautoclave screening tests with 2:1 tetralin: Illinois No. 6 coal, 425 °C, 1 h, 1000 psi H2,227 425 °C, 0.5 h, 1000 psig (cold) of H2, 5000 ppm Fe, 0.1 g of S added to 9.9 g of a 2:l mixture of PANASOL to coal. 
Table 10 Effect of FeOOH mode of addition on coal conversion of DECS-6 blind canyon coal, Illinois No. 6, and Black Thunder coal229




Precursor
Coal conversion (%)


THF sols
Heptane sols





Blind Canyon



None
58
30


Physically mixed FeOOH
66
34


Impregnated FeOOH
85
41



Illinois No. 6



None
53
25


Physically mixed FeOOH
67
40


Impregnated FeOOH
83
50



Black Thunder



None
54
30


Physically mixed FeOOH
64
35


Impregnated FeOOH
79
39




In the case of low rank coals, ion exchange procedures have been used to replace surface carboxyl-bound calcium or magnesium ions by iron ions, which under liquefaction conditions are converted to highly dispersed and catalytically active iron species.230,231 Kaneko et al. reported that a synthetic γ-FeOOH catalyst (lepidcrocite) exhibited an excellent liquefaction activity because of its transformation into smaller crystallite size of pyrrhotites (Fe1−xS) under liquefaction conditions.212,232,233 Naturally available limonite (α-FeOOH) ores were pulverized and used as catalysts for the liquefaction of coal.234 The limonite catalysts can be used in a commercial plant for coal liquefaction due to low cost and high activity.
(iii) Sulfated catalysts. 
Iron catalyst activities can be improved by modifying their composition. One approach has been to change the surface properties of hematite particles either by treating a precipitated FeOOH with H2SO4 or by precipitating FeOOH in the presence of the sulfate anion.225,235–237 After calcination, these catalysts are transformed to Fe2O3/SO42−. The sulfate group is believed to be responsible for superacidity, and can also help to prevent sintering of the catalyst particles, which may relate to their enhanced activity.
(iv) Mixed metal catalysts. 
The efficiency of iron-based catalysts can be improved by adding other metals. According to Hume-Rothery rules, materials with similar ionic sizes (±15%) may be substituted into one another's lattice framework relatively easily. The ionic radii of metals such as Co, Cu, Mg, Mo, Ni or Sn are close to that of iron. Hence, it is reasonable to expect that these sulfides may be particularly suitable as additives. Hager et al. studied the effect of adding Co, Ni, W and Mo on the activity of iron-based catalyst for the liquefaction of Black Thunder coal and observed an increase in activity with Mo addition.238 Pradhan et al. also noted a beneficial effect on the activity of a sulfated hematite catalyst upon adding Mo or W.235 Tian et al. noted a benefit when using smaller amounts of the second metals.239 Zhao et al. observed a reduction in the agglomeration of a ferrihydrate catalyst when Si or Al was introduced into the catalyst.240 The mixed metal catalysts in all these studies are prepared by nonaerosol techniques. Dadyburjor and co-workers synthesized fine particles (3–20 nm) of ferric sulfide based mixed metal catalysts in aerosol reactors.241,242 The aerosol materials generally have lower bulk densities compared with typical iron sulfide. This is due to the presence of elemental sulfur from disproportionation, to the presence of a second metal, and to the hollow nature of the aerosols. Liquefaction studies using aerosol catalysts show them to be more selective to the formation of oil compared to the catalysts which are impregnated in coal.242
(v) Active site and influence of H2S. 
Under the conditions of liquefaction, iron applied in oxide or oxyhydroxide form is converted to sulfides by reaction with sulfur in the coal or added sulfur. These include pyrite (FeS2) and non-stoichiometric iron sulfides such as troilite (FeS) and pyrrhotite (Fe1−xS). Of these sulfides, the more active form is considered to be pyrrhotite.11,209,232,243,244 The evolution of H2S from FeS2 during liquefaction produces the catalytic Fe1−xS; compounds of intermediate stoichiometry between FeS2 and FeS. Sulfur deficient sites in these compounds are believed to activate molecular hydrogen.212 Kaneko et al. systematically studied the transformation of iron compounds (α-FeOOH, γ-FeOOH, ferrihydrate, limonite and pyrite) into active phase pyrrhotite (Fe1−xS) through the sulfidation tests.232 The order of transformation temperatures from these compounds into pyrrhotite was as follows: ferrihydrate (FeOOH) (250 °C) < limonite ore (300 °C) < pyrite (350 °C). The crystal growth of pyrrhotite proceeded in the following order: γ-FeOOH < limonite, α-FeOOH, and ferrihydrate < pyrite (FeS2). It was noted that γ-FeOOH showed high activity for coal liquefaction due to transformation into pyrrhotite with smaller crystallite sizes under liquefaction conditions. Ikenaga et al. studied the sulfidation of iron catalysts (γ-FeOOH, α-FeOOH, Fe(CO)5, Fe3(CO)12 and natural pyrite) using XRD and XPS techniques.245 The active phase pyrrhotite (Fe1−xS) is transformed from FeOOH via pyrite as an intermediate. However, the formation of a pyrite intermediate is not observed for iron carbonyl complexes.
Increasing the partial pressure of H2S will promote precursor conversion and can have an important influence on catalyst activity. Yokoyama et al. reported that the activities of FeS and Fe1−xS were enhanced under pressure of H2S.246 In the presence of added pyrrhotite, increasing the H2S partial pressure has been shown to enhance the hydrocracking of diphenyl ether and biphenyl methane.247 One explanation of these phenomena is that the H2S partial pressure serves both to maintain the catalyst in its sulfide state, to control its stoichiometry,248 and also to suppress the crystal growth of pyrrhotite—an active phase in the liquefaction.232


7.1.2 Non-Fe-based catalysts. 
Although iron remains the catalytic metal of choice because of cost and availability, the effectiveness of well dispersed Mo at low concentrations has led to much research on precursors based on it and on possible recovery and recycle of the catalyst. Dow Chemical developed a Mo-catalyzed single stage liquefaction process, in which a partial recycling of the catalyst via hydroclone reduced the addition of fresh Mo catalyst by 100 ppm.11,216 Dispersed catalysts, especially those based on the sulfides of Mo, are often used in direct liquefaction209,248 and MoS2 appears to be the more active form.249 Early work on the role of molybdenum catalysts has been summarized by Storch.250 MoS2 catalysts serve several functions which include the promotion of hydrogenation and the removal of heteroatoms. Model compound studies have demonstrated that sulfides of molybdenum are effective in supplying activated molecular hydrogen for the stabilization of free radicals generated by thermolysis of C–C and C–O bonds.251
Impregnation of the coal with water soluble inorganic salts or oil soluble compounds, such as naphthenates, generates finely divided active catalysts during liquefaction.252,253 Ammonium heptamolybdate (AHM)254,255 and ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (ATTM)86,159,256–258 have commonly been used as precursors. Organometallic compounds such as Mo(CO)6 have also been tested as catalyst precursors,259 and often require the addition of sulfur compounds,159,224 unless used with high sulfur coals. The highly dispersed catalysts provide contact with coal–solvent slurries even at low catalyst concentrations, reduce intraparticle diffusion limitations, and provide effective contact with primary liquids released from coal.260 The addition of H2S to the reactor has also been found to enhance the liquefaction of coals.159,261 The precursor may not be active itself, but it is transformed at elevated temperatures into an active catalyst.
The effect of structure of the Mo–Co bimetallic molecular precursors (Mo–Co thiocubane) on their catalytic activity of liquefaction of a subbituminous coal has been reported by Song and co-workers.262 The structure and composition of the precursors significantly affect the activity of the resulting bimetallic catalyst. The bimetallic catalyst derived from Mo–Co thiocubane is significantly more active than those from either Mo(CO)6 + Co(CO)8 or those from mixed metal carbonyls plus sulfur. Hu et al. studied the effect Fe addition to Mo sulfide bimetallic catalyst Fe2(MoS4)3.263 The catalyst is prepared as follows (eqn (9)): Fe2(SO4)3 + 3(NH4)2MoS4 → Fe2(MoS4)3 + 3(NH4)2SO4(9)
The catalyst shows higher hydroliquefaction activity than the conventional monometallic catalyst i.e. Fe2S3 or ATTM.
A strong promoting effect of H2O on low severity coal liquefaction using molybdenum sulfide catalyst in situ generated from ATTM was reported by Song and co-workers.86,264,265 Model reactions coupled with liquefaction data suggest that a more highly dispersed MoS2 catalyst with higher surface area is produced from ATTM in the presence of added water under proper conditions.86,266 However, the use of water appears to have a negative impact on catalytic coal conversion at higher temperatures such as 400–425 °C (Fig. 14). The use of an active hydrogen-donor solvent can alleviate this effect at higher temperatures. As shown in Fig. 15, the strong promoting effect of water appeared whenever it is combined with ATTM for catalytic reaction at 350 °C, regardless of the pretreatment of coal (raw, vacuum-dried, or air-dried at 100 °C).86 The results obtained from this work show promising new directions for further research in catalytic conversion of coal to liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks.
 Fig. 14  Effect of reaction temperature on conversion of DECS-8 Wyodak coal with ATTM in the presence and absence of added water without using organic solvent.86 
 Fig. 15  Effect of water addition on liquefaction of DECS-8 Wyodak coal at 350 °C for 30 min using ATTM loaded on the fresh raw coal (Raw), vacuum-dried coal (VD) and air-dried coal (AD) without any organic solvent. Cat means catalyst precursor ATTM.86 
Recently Wang et al. reported sulfated ZrO2 solid superacids for the Shenhua coal hydroliquefaction. These catalysts showed higher coal conversion and gas + oil yield compared to conventional FeS and Fes + S.267 Catalytic properties of SO42−/ZrO2 solid acids for liquefaction are related to their acid strength, amount and nature of acid sites. The strong acid site dominates their catalytic activities and the coal conversion increases with increasing amount of strong acid sites.268 The hydrocracking reaction of model compounds follows carbenium ion intermediates instead of radical intermediate.


7.1.3 Acid catalysts. 
Acid catalyzed coal depolymerization has been used as an analytical technique and for liquefaction.269,270 Liquid acids such as BF3 in the presence of excess phenol,271p-toluenesulfonic acid,272 HF–BF3,269 HF–TaF5273 and CF3SO3H/I2274,275 and molten salt,276,277 have been widely studied at temperatures ranging from 100 °C to 350 °C with low hydrogen pressure. The efficiency of a homogeneous catalyst over heterogeneous catalyst is expected to be high because a heterogeneous inorganic solid cannot penetrate the macromolecular network structure of insoluble coal. For the first time, Haenel et al. reported coal hydrogenation of high rank bituminous coals including anthracite at 350 °C in the presence of toluene using homogeneous catalysts iodoboranes or BI3 as catalysts.278 The solid products resulted from this process were highly aliphatic (Caliph:Carom = 60:40, from C13 SS NMR) as compared with the original coals (Caliph:Carom = 11:89). The hydrogenated products could subsequently liquefy in a hydrogen solvent. The feasibility of two-stage liquefaction process for high-rank coals was demonstrated on the example of the low volatile bituminous (lvb) coal (Magerkohle). For this purpose the original low-volatile bituminous (lvb) coal having 11% Caliph and its hydrogenation product having 60% Caliph (obtained from the hydrogenation with equimolar NaBH4/I2) were compared with respect to their reactivity towards a hydrocracking process (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Comparison of the products obtained from the one-stage and two-stage liquefaction of low volatile bituminous coal.278 The 13C CP-MAS NMR signals indicate Caliph/Carom. 
Thus in summary, direct liquefaction with hydrogen becomes possible also for high rank coals, which so far can be processed only by combustion or gasification.
The most important of these catalysts are metal halides such as ZnCl2277,279 and SnCl2,276 a mild Lewis acid in combination with Brönsted acid such as HCl or with co-metals such as Ni.280 This type of catalyst can cleave the linkages believed to connect coal structural units and crack the structures that comprise these units at much lower temperatures and pressures than those used in conventional liquefaction processes. They are effective in the removal of heteroatoms and can generally increase the rate of coal conversion. This could be because metal halides of interest are molten at subpyrolysis temperatures, which appears to aid their penetration into the coal structure by vapor phase transport. Cracking reactions proceed by an ionic mechanism in which protonation of the reactants is the initial and rate limiting step (Scheme 8). The driving force is the strength of the acid.
 Scheme 8  Bond scission promoted by ZnCl2. 
Struck and Zielke developed a coal liquefaction process that uses large quantities of molten zinc chloride (1:1 wt ratio of ZnCl2 and coal).281 The major advantage with ZnCl2 is that its high activity and selectivity combined with its low cost. It is sufficiently active to crack polynuclear aromatic compounds but is inactive in hydrocracking single ring aromatics. The result is that it selectively produces gasoline range distillates in high yields. However, ZnCl2 is rapidly deactivated by NH3 and H2S that are produced during hydrogenation and hydrocracking by reactions (10) and (11). ZnCl2 + NH3 → ZnCl2·NH3(10) ZnCl2 + H2S → ZnS + 2HCl(11)
Song et al. reported that ternary salts such as MoCl3–LiCl–KCl and NiCl2–KCl–LiCl are effective hydrocracking catalysts for hydroliquefaction of a subbituminous coal. They show high selectivity for production of oil (hexane soluble).282,283 The addition of the hydrogen donor tetralin to these catalyst systems further improved the oil yields (Fig. 17).284
 Fig. 17  Influence of loading level of (A) MoCl3–LiCl–KCl, (B) NiCl2–LiCl–KCl, and (C) LiCl–KCl on coal conversion.284 
The requirement of massive concentrations of catalysts (catalyst to coal ratio ≥1), need for efficient catalyst recovery, and their corrosive nature are the major drawbacks in utilizing these catalysts in commercial processes.

7.2 Catalysts for coal liquids upgrading
For coal liquefaction, supported catalysts are commonly used in fixed bed to upgrade and refine the primary crude coal liquids derived from the 1st stage of liquefaction.89 They have been used also in ebullated bed processes to promote coal dissolution as well as upgrading in single step (e.g. H-coal process, USA).8,216 The most widely used catalysts are Co–Mo and Ni–Mo sulfides supported on γ-Al2O3 that are used in the refining industry.209 The catalysts are only active in their sulfided form.248 The supporting and sulfiding procedures and the amount of supported sulfides greatly influence the activity of the catalyst.285
MoS2 is considered to be the catalytically active phase and Ni and Co to be promoters.286 In the case of nonpromoted catalysts, experimental studies indicate that the main catalytic activity is provided at the edges of MoS2 clusters where sulfur vacancies are created. It is generally believed that sulfur containing molecules cannot adsorb on completely sulfided catalysts; consequently sulfur vacancies have to be created.287 The performance of MoS2 catalysts for HDS can be significantly improved by the aid of metallic promoters such as Co or Ni. For such systems, Co–Mo–S and Ni–Mo–S structures, consisting of small MoS2 clusters with promoter atoms located at the edges, are responsible for the HDS activity.288 EXAFS studies by Bouwens et al. showed remarkable synergistic enhancement of sulfided Co–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts during HDS reactions.289 However, precise identification of the location of promoter species as well as their role upon the reactivity still continues to be a subject of intense investigations for both theoretical290,291 and experimental groups.292 Co–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts are usually used for hydrodesulfurization (HDS) and Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts for hydrodenitogenation (HDN), because Ni promotes hydrogenation which is necessary for HDN. Ru has been used as an additive to Co–Mo and Ni–Mo to improve their hydrogenation and denitrogenation activities.280
The important factors for improving the performance and life of supported catalyst systems are compositions, pore structure, surface properties, promoter, and support type. Catalyst pore structure determines how easily the reactants can access the interior surface of the catalyst. In general, hydroprocessing catalysts are prepared by impregnation methods, and the catalyst pore structure is determined mainly by the support. The earliest coal liquefaction catalysts were designed for hydrofining petroleum distillates and were ineffective for high molecular weight coal liquids because of their small and easily clogged pores.293 Increasing the proportion of larger pores has improved activity.293 Earlier reports by Ho and Weller,294 and Shimada et al.295 have shown that pore diffusional limitation of reaction rates can be serious in the hydroliquefaction of coals over supported catalysts. Song et al. examined the effects of pore size of uni-modal Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts for the hydrocracking of asphaltene and preasphaltene fractions.296 These studies reveal that increasing median pore diameter (MPD) of Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts increased the conversion of both asphaltene and preasphaltenes. The preferable pore size appears to be larger for converting preasphaltenes than that for asphaltene conversion. Analysis of the products revealed the catalyst MPD considerably affects the hydrodeoxygenation and hydrodesulfurization reactions, and optimum pore size ranges exist for the removal of oxygen and sulfur. Co–Mo and Ni–Mo supported on alumina catalysts were examined for their catalytic activities of hydrogenation, hydrocracking and heteroatoms removal by altering pore size distribution of alumina.297
Song et al. studied the effect of pore size and particle size of Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts on their performance in the hydroprocessing and heteroatom removal. They compared these results with as carbon coated catalysts.298Fig. 18 shows the relationship between MPD and conversions of BI and asphaltene for runs of Wan-SRC over carbon-coated as well as fresh Ni–Mo catalysts. The pattern for dependence of conversion of heavy fractions upon MPD (Fig. 18) is similar to that for fresh Ni–Mo catalysts. It is interesting to note that the carbon-coated catalyst gave substantially higher conversions of BI than the fresh catalysts, but the latter gave higher asphaltene conversions. Also, they observed that pure SiO2 supported catalysts gave higher benzene insoluble (BI) conversion. These results point to the conclusion that less acidic and large pore hydrogenation catalysts are more effective for the conversion of preasphaltenes, but the efficient conversion of asphaltenes into oil is facilitated by mild hydrocracking catalysts having appropriate pore size ranges.
 Fig. 18  Relation between MPD and conversion of BI and asphaltenes fractions from hydroprocessing over carbon-coated and fresh Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts.298 
The degree of heteroatom removal is also influenced by catalyst MPD. Preferable pore size ranges are 12–29 nm for catalytic hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) (Fig. 19), with specific ranges depending on the nature of feedstocks and operating conditions. Unlike HDO, the hydrodesulfurization (HDS) degree of the sulfur rich asphaltenes reached a maximum at MPD of 29 nm as shown in Fig. 20, which corresponds to the lowest ‘S’ content of oil and asphaltene products and the highest H2S yield in gas. HDS of petroleum residues over MCM-41 supported Co–Mo catalysts was reported by Reddy et al.299 The results indicate that Co–Mo/MCM-41 is active for HDS, but is not as active as commercial Co–Mo/Al2O3 for desulfurization of petroleum residues. It appears that the pore size of the synthesized MCM-41 (2.8 nm) is not large enough to convert large-sized molecules such as asphaltene present in the petroleum residues. The results (though still preliminary) are very useful in directing future research for applying MCM-41 in coal liquids upgrading.
 Fig. 19  Effect of catalyst MPD on oxygen contents of oil and asphaltenes products from hydroprocessing over fresh () and carbon-coated () Ni–Mo/Al2O3.298 
 Fig. 20  Effects of MPD of Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts on the sulfur and oxygen contents of oil and asphaltene products from hydroprocessing of sulfur rich asphaltenes.298 
The catalytic activity was found to be sufficient in the initial stages of reaction, but decreased with time. This decrease was caused by deposition of carbon, which is formed by basic and polar components in the coal liquid.300,301 Deactivation was severe when asphaltenes and preasphaltenes were in the feed.302 Ca doped Ni–Mo/Al2O3 with bimodal pore distribution has been developed in the Brown Coal Liquefaction (BCL) process, Australia, which has been shown to have a stable activity.303 The decrease in the acidity of the catalysts was done by adding alkaline earth metals such as Ca to Ni–Mo/Al2O3 results in decreasing the coke deposition over the catalyst.303 Also, alternative supports such as TiO2, TiO2–Al2O3 and carbon have been investigated to reduce the catalyst deactivation caused by coke deposition.83,209
The high conversion and oil yields of nanoparticulate carbon supported Ni–Mo, Fe–Mo, and Fe–Mo–Ni catalysts with extreme high surface area and low density were reported by several researchers.304–306 The high activity is due to the hollow structure of spherical carbon particles (Ketjen Black, KB). Its hollow spheres of low gravity suggest the possibility of gravimetric recovery.
The reaction pathways for HDS of model compounds 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT) and dibenzothiophene (DBT) over NiMo and CoMo sulfide and nickel phosphide catalysts were studied by Song et al. The kinetic studies reveal that HDS can proceed through an indirect hydrogenation pathway for 4,6-DMDBT and a direct desulfurization pathway for DBT (Scheme 9).307
 Scheme 9  4,6-Dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT) hydrodesulfurization (HDS) via a ring hydrogenation network (denoted by the rate constant k1) and a direct C–S bond hydrogenolysis network (denoted by the rate constant k2).307 
7.3 Catalyst deactivation
Coal and coal derived liquids contain a number of catalyst poisons or poison precursors, which severely deactivate the catalysts during the liquefaction process. Active site covering and pore plugging by deposition of carbonaceous species and coke, the formation of mineral matter shell over the catalyst surface which sinters upon heating to regeneration temperatures or changes in catalyst active phase during the coal liquefaction process are the major causes for the deactivation of catalysts.300,301,308
The catalysts commonly used in coal liquefaction are sulfides of iron or complex sulfides of Co or Ni and Mo supported over alumina that are acidic or at least polar. The organic compounds that are derived from coal are mostly high molecular weight aromatics, many of which contain N and O functional groups. Some of them contain basic nitrogen and acidic oxygen. Because of their acid–base or polar interactions with catalyst surface, they remain on the catalyst for the extended periods of time, even if they are partially converted. Products that are difficult to desorb eventually become coke, irreversible adsorbing on the catalyst surface, hence loss of activity. Coke deposition can be rapid and can contribute to the initial loss of activity. Fig. 21 shows the formation of coke-like substances increases with increasing acidity of the catalysts, indicating that the acid sites on the catalyst are related to the formation of coke-like substances.303
 Fig. 21  Effect of acidic properties of catalysts on the formation of coke-like substances. Modified from T. Masuyama et al., Fuel, 1990, 69, 245. 
Intraparticle diffusion resistance affects the rate of catalyst deactivation. Catalysts with larger diffusional resistance deactivate more slowly than those having lower resistance. Modifications to the pore structure of the catalyst or changes in catalyst diameter can be used to effect changes in the level of resistance encountered.309
Metal deposition on catalysts normally increases continuously with time on stream, but at a decreasing rate. Precipitation of very fine solids originating from organic bound metal ions (Na, Ca, Ti and K) that thermally decompose during the liquefaction appears to be a significant factor in catalyst deactivation. This prevents the regeneration of the catalyst. Even reduction in the extent of sulfiding leads to significant loss in catalyst activity. In addition, the deposited metals change active metal structures such as crystal growth, sintering and transformation of active sulfides into less active oxides/sulfates.310 While the deactivation due to carbonaceous deposits is reversible by oxidative regeneration, deposited metals are difficult to remove by normal regeneration procedures.
8 Coal liquids
The initially solubilized coal is high in molecular mass and cannot be distilled. Extended thermal or catalytic treatment is necessary for the production of distillates. In all cases, a distribution of products is obtained that includes light gases, distillate liquids, and nondistillable liquid which may be solid at room temperature. DCL processes produce a heavy high vacuum tower bottom material (residue) from the product separation step, which usually accounts for 20–30 wt% of coal that fed to the liquefaction reactor. This residue usually consists of unreacted coal, ash and 30–50 wt% of heavy liquids.311,312 Its effective utilization is important for the economics of the DCL process.
The coal liquefaction products are normally characterized by their boiling range (distillate fractions) or by their solubility in different solvents. Hence, the liquefaction conversions are expressed as distillate yields per unit mass of coal or as their solubility characteristics (Scheme 10).313 The quantities of the fractions isolated from coal liquids are sensitive to the solvent separation procedure.314,315 The distinction between these fractions entirely depends on the solubility and has no relationship to their chemical structures.
 Scheme 10  Solvent fractionation of non-distillable coal products. 
Preasphaltenes consist of large coal fragments formed in the initial liquefaction stage by thermal cleavage of a few most reactive bonds and contain heteroatoms similar to that of parent coal. The chemical composition of asphaltenes depends on the parent coal and liquefaction conditions. Lengthy hydrotreatment increases aromaticity and decreases the amount of polar functional groups and molecular mass.316,317 Converting DCL residue into more soluble fraction and understanding molecular composition of the soluble fraction are essential for its effective utilization. Residue can be used as a feedstock for gasification after heavy oil separation, in the preparation of advanced carbon materials,318 or hydrogenation of heavy oils separated from residue by recycling into the same liquefaction reactor using Fe catalysts319 or alumina-supported Ni–Mo or Co–Mo catalysts.320
Fuel properties of liquids from a typical direct coal liquefaction process are shown in Table 11.20 The major advance in the coal liquefaction technology is in the upgrading of the raw coal liquids and the control of selectivity to products.31 As shown in Table 12, as much as 70% of the raw product from a proprietary process can be made into high-quality motor gasoline or 50% into diesel fuel, or 63% into high density jet fuels, thus providing flexibility to respond to market demand.
Table 11 Properties of DCL liquids




 
DCL
EPA 2006 diesel specifications




Product mix
65% Diesel and 35% naphtha




Diesel cetane
42–47
>40


Diesel sulfur
<5 ppm
<15 ppm


Diesel aromatics
4.8 wt%
<35%


Diesel specific gravity
0.865




Naphtha octane (RON)
>100




Naphtha sulfur
<0.5 ppm




Naphtha aromatics
5 wt%




Naphtha specific gravity
0.764




Thermal efficiency (%)
60–70






Table 12 Upgrading selectivities (%) for raw coal liquids31




Product maximized for
Reformate
Light naphtha
Diesel fuel
Jet fuel




Motor gasoline
70
24
6
0


Diesel fuel
50
11
39
0


Jet fuel
13
11
13
63




Song et al. reported that coal-derived JP-8 jet fuel is more thermally stable than petroleum-derived JP-8 fuel, thereby reducing the formation of solid deposits in aircraft engines.321 Coal derived JP-8 is rich in one- to three-ring cycloalkanes and two-ring hydroaromatics, while petroleum-derived JP-8 is composed mainly of long-chain paraffins. The stability of cycloalkanes is higher than that of long-chain paraffins. Selective catalytic conversion of PAHs present in coal can be very useful for making polycyclic specialty chemicals that have potential industrial applications. Recently Song reported the shape selective synthesis of high value added chemicals from polycyclic aromatic compounds that are rich in coal derived liquids (Fig. 22) using large pore zeolite catalysts such as mordenite and Y-zeolite.322,323 These PAH chemicals can serve as monomers in the synthesis of aromatic polymer materials such as engineering plastics, polyester resins, fibers, polyimides and liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs).
 Fig. 22  Value added chemicals and monomers of advanced polymer materials from DCL derived one- to four-ring aromatic compounds.323 
9. Challenges and future directions
The complexity of coal structure and chemistry has important implications for conversion technologies and catalysis. Coals are inhomogeneous on the macroscopic, microscopic, and molecular levels. They are insoluble, opaque, macromolecular systems composed of a mixture of organic and inorganic constituents. While there has been a significant advance in knowledge of coal's physical and chemical structures, knowledge and understanding of coal chemical reactions are still limited. Most of the available tools for determining chemical structure are designed to work with systems of pure compounds and either do not work when applied to coals or become insurmountably complex.
One of the major challenges in commercialization of direct coal liquefaction process is that the newer technologies, which are much more advanced and sophisticated than the technologies of 1940's have not undergone demonstration at large scales. Detailed chemical reaction information in the three phase (solid–liquid–gas) system are not yet known entirely and the reliability of the key equipments designed today is not confirmed by long term operations. Shenhua DCL Plant could be the source of this information and provide the confidence needed to develop more commercial processes. Furthermore, increasingly stringent specifications for transportation fuels and environmental requirements for waste management must be addressed, along with new chemical reaction engineering challenges.
Operating and capital costs
DCL operates under severe reaction conditions involving high temperatures and pressures that influence capital costs. It requires continuous supply of expensive H2 at high pressures (via coal gasification). Large pressurized reactors and compressors lead to high operating and capital costs. The other issues that influence the commercial deployment of DCL are complicated solid/liquid/gas separation units, more durable letdown valves and removal of heteroatoms such as S and N from exhaust/flue gases. A challenge is to optimize these conditions to reduce capital and operating costs.
The hydrogen needed for direct liquefaction would typically be produced from gasification. This requires gas cleanup, cooling, and water gas shift to convert carbon monoxide and water to hydrogen and CO2, followed by CO2 removal. There would be significant energy and capital cost savings if the hot gasifier gas could be used without cleanup, cooling, and shift/CO removal.324
Reactive feedstock
Reactive and complex mixtures of solid and liquid fractions with different functionalities and molecular weights greatly complicate the design of DCL processes. Other challenges include reactive coal–oil slurry with changing viscosities that are difficult to pump; dynamic in situ changes in solubility, polarity, and acidity/basicity; and breaking –O–C- and –CH2-linkages between ring structures.
Solvents and catalyst
Solvent molecules along with catalyst are required not only to promote molecular weight reducing reactions of coal liquefaction, but also to prevent retrogressive reactions which are likely to occur with most coals. Dispersed Mo sulfide catalysts can be more effective but are more expensive; effective recovery and re-use of catalyst are required, but can be costly. Dispersed Fe catalysts are cheaper but less active in upgrading reactions. Supported Mo-based catalysts are active; but pore plugging and metal deposits can cause major deactivation of supported catalysts. The efficacy of solid catalysts when used with solid coals is far less than their effectiveness in fluid systems. Opportunities exist to develop entirely new catalysts that will contact coals and effect desired reactions.
CO2 management
CO2 capture and storage (CCS) has been another major concern in application of coal liquefaction technologies. Including the CO2 associated with the production of hydrogen for DCL, ∼7 to 10 times as much CO2 is emitted in converting coal to transport fuels, when compared with crude oil.21 About 82% of this CO2 (Fig. 23) comes from hydrogen production alone. However, this CO2 is in a concentrated form and can readily be sequestrated.
 Fig. 23  Carbon footprint in DCL plant.325 

Opportunities to facilitate DCL deployment include:

• More energy-efficient DCL reaction chemistry by designing better reactors, effective catalysts, more active solvents, with the objective of producing products with a H/C ratio closer to 2/1.
• Use of low-cost subbituminous coal or lignite, especially deposits having high hydrogen-to-carbon ratios.
• Complete conversion to liquids with boiling points below 540 °C.
• Improved selectivity to minimize production of water, and hydrocarbon gases.
• Combined coal and renewable energy processes for improved carbon footprint, e.g., production of H2 from biomass rather than fossil sources.
• Synergistic opportunities for hybrid DCL/ICL technology integration.
• Co-processing with heavy oil/refinery bottoms/wastes.
• Improved product de-ashing technology.
• Co-production of DCL fuels and electricity with advanced gasification systems (IGCC), which studies suggest could reduce the cost significantly.
• Methods to add value to the DCL residue since the residue accounts for 30 wt% of the feed and contains 30–50 wt% coal liquids.
• Evaluating and defining optimum upgrading strategy to final products, whether on site or through integration with a refinery.
• Develop higher throughput liquefaction reactor and slurry pre-heaters.
• Develop an effective CO2 management and control/utilization strategy.
• Verifying that liquid products meet all fuel, health, and safety standards for commercial use.
10. Conclusions
Coal can play a key role in our energy future in ways that go beyond electric power generation. Clean liquid fuels from coal can become a promising option to fill in a significant and widening gap between supply and demand. Coal is an important bridge to a sustainable future. Direct coal liquefaction to produce transport fuels is technically feasible; major advances have been achieved in improving liquid yields (∼4 bbl per ton coal) and quality through laboratory R&D and pilot plants in 1980's and1990's. Liquids from direct coal liquefaction are valuable feedstocks for fuels as well as chemicals and materials.
DCL commercialization in Shenhua, China is a major step forward in the world. DCL is still more expensive than petroleum-based processes, owing to its high capital and operating costs in the US. Studies suggest that DCL would emit significantly more CO2, so DCL plants need to incorporate carbon management strategy.
DCL achieves thermal conversion efficiency of ∼65%, but given these benefits DCL technology for deployment in the US is likely not to be cost competitive with refined crude oil products based on current crude oil prices. Fundamentally more energy-efficient DCL processes with high coal to oil yields that will work effectively and continuously must be commercially demonstrated.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the financial support from Department of Energy/NETL for supporting coal liquefaction research and development at Louisiana State University and Penn State University.
References

US Department of Energy Hydrogen, Fuel Cells and Infrastructure Technologies program, Hydrogen Posture plan, US Department of Energy,  2006 Search PubMed .
US Department of Energy EIA, US Government,  2007, http://www.eia.doe.gov/neic/brochure/gas06/gasoline.htm.
R. Agrawal, N. R. Singh, F. H. Ribeiro and W. N. Delgass, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 4828–4833 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of Alternative Fuel Technologies, ed. S. Lee, J. G. Speight and S. K. Loyalka, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2007 Search PubMed .
E. Furimsky, Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Util. Environ. Eff., 2008, 30, 119–131 Search PubMed .
D. Hildebrandt, D. Glasser, B. Hausberger, B. Patel and B. J. Glasser, Science, 2009, 323, 1680–1681 CrossRef .
US Department of Energy, IEA,  2008, http://www.iea.org/textbase/nppdf/free/2008/key_stats_2008.pdf.

Coal and Coal-Related Compounds—Structures, Reactivity and Catalytic Reactions, ed. T. Kabe, A. Ishihara, E. W. Qian, I. P. Sutrisna and Y. Kabe, Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis,  2004, vol. 150, pp. 1–341 Search PubMed .

          G. B. Miller, Coal Energy Systems, Elsevier Academic Press,  2005 Search PubMed .

          D. B. Dadyburjor and Z. Liu, Coal Liquefaction, in Kirk–Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2004 Search PubMed .

          T. Kaneko, F. Derbyshire, E. Makino, D. Gray and M. Tamura, Coal Liquefaction, in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2005 Search PubMed .
Southern States Energy Board and Management Information Services, Inc.,  2006.

          Z. Zhang and Z. Men, Petroleum Refinery Engineering, Lianyou Sheji Bianjibu,  2003, vol. 33, pp. 58–61 Search PubMed .
T. B. Simpson, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1599–1600 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Williams and E. D. Larson, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2003, 7, 103–129 Search PubMed .
J. P. Longwell, E. S. Rubin and J. Wilson, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 1995, 21, 269–360 CrossRef CAS .

          W. R. K. Wu and H. H. Storch, Hydrogenation of Coal and Tar, US Bureau of Mines, Bulletin 633,  1968 Search PubMed.
R. E. Lumpkin, Science, 1988, 239, 873–877 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Bickel and M. G. Thomas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1982, 21, 377–381 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Park, C. Park, H. J. Kim, H. Jung and C. Han, Korean Chem. Eng. Res., 2008, 46, 248–257 Search PubMed .

Coal Liquefaction Technology Status Report, Department of trade and industry, UK,  October 1999, http://www.dti.gov.uk/files/file18326.pdf Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Shi and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 12–17 CrossRef CAS .

          J. G. Speight, The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Larsen and M. L. Gorbaty, in Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology, ed. A. M. RobertAcademic Press, New York,  2001, pp. 107–122 Search PubMed .
M. Nishioka, W. Laird, P. G. Bendale and R. A. Zeli, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 643–648 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Larsen, D. Lee and S. E. Shawver, Fuel Process. Technol., 1986, 12, 51–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Haenel, Fuel, 1992, 71, 1211–1223 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Given, Fuel, 1960, 39, 147–153 CAS .

          W. H. Wiser, Proceedings of the EPRI Conference on Coal Catalysis, Santa Monica, CA,  1973, P. 3 Search PubMed .
J. H. Shinn, Fuel, 1984, 63, 1187–1196 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Gorbaty, Fuel, 1994, 73, 1819–1828 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. van Heek, Fuel, 2000, 79, 1–26 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wender, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1976, 14, 97–129 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Solum, R. J. Pugmire and D. M. Grant, Energy Fuels, 1989, 3, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Whitehurst, A Primer on the Chemistry and Constitution of Coal, American Chemical Society,  1978 Search PubMed .

          G. F. Morrison, Chemical Desulfurization of Coal, IEA Coal Research, Report ICTIS/TR15,  1981 Search PubMed .
M. L. Gorbaty and S. R. Kelemen, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 71, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Calkins, Energy Fuels, 1987, 1, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Vorres, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 420–426 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. George, M. L. Gorbaty, S. R. Kelemen and M. Sansone, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Huffman, S. Mitra, F. E. Huggins, N. Shah, S. Vaidya and F. Lu, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 574–581 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kelemen, M. L. Gorbaty and P. J. Kwiatek, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 896–906 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Huggins, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2002, 50, 169–214 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Ward, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2002, 50, 135–168 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. O'Gorman and P. L. Walker,Jr, Fuel, 1971, 50, 135–151 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Vassilev and J. M. D. Tascon, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 271–281 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bommannavar and P. A. Montano, Fuel, 1982, 61, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. White, D. H. Smith, K. L. Jones, A. L. Goodman, S. A. Jikich, R. B. LaCount, S. B. DuBose, E. Ozdemir, B. I. Morsi and K. T. Schroeder, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 659–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kelemen, L. M. Kwiatek, M. Siskin and A. G. K. Lee, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Larsen, P. Hall and P. C. Wernett, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 324–330 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Walker and O. P. Mahajan, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 559–560 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Berens and H. B. Hopfenberg, J. Membr. Sci., 1982, 10, 283–303 CrossRef CAS .

Polynuclear Aromatic Compounds, ed. N. Berkowitz, ACS, Washington DC,  1988 Search PubMed .
M. L. Gorbaty, S. C. Mraw, J. S. Gethner and D. Brenner, Fuel Process. Technol., 1986, 12, 31–49 CrossRef .

          R. M. Davidson, Molecular Structure of Coal, Report number ICTIS/TR 08, IEA Coal Research, London,  1980 Search PubMed .

          R. M. Davidson, Molecular Structure of Coal, in Coal Science, ed. M. L. Gorbaty, J. W. Larsen and I. Wender, Academic Press, New York,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. Iino, Fuel Process. Technol., 2000, 62, 89–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nishioka, Fuel, 1992, 71, 941–948 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Niekerk and J. P. Mathews, Fuel, 2010, 89, 73–82 CrossRef .
P. H. Given, A. Marzec, W. A. Barton, L. J. Lynch and B. C. Gerstein, Fuel, 1986, 65, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Given and A. Marzec, Fuel, 1988, 67, 242–244 CrossRef CAS .
F. Derbyshire, A. Marzec, H.-R. Schulten, M. A. Wilson, A. Davis, P. Tekely, J.-J. Delpuech, A. Jurkiewicz, C. E. Bronnimann, R. A. Wind, G. E. Maciel, R. Narayan, K. Bartle and C. Snape, Fuel, 1989, 68, 1091–1106 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Larsen, R. A. Flowers, P. J. Hall and G. Carlson, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 998–1002 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yun and E. M. Suuberg, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 798–800 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iino, T. Takanohashi, H. Ohsuga and K. Toda, Fuel, 1988, 67, 1639–1647 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, K. Norinaga, Y. Masui and M. Iino, Energy Fuels, 2001, 15, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nishioka and J. W. Larsen, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 100–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Larsen and M. Mohammadi, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Barton and L. J. Lynch, Energy Fuels, 1989, 3, 402–411 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Sakurovs, L. J. Lynch and W. A. Barton, Molecular Conformation and Stability of Coal Macerals, in Coal Science II, ed. H. H. Schobert, K. D. Bartle and L. J. Lynch, American Chemical Society, Washington DC,  1991, pp. 111–126 Search PubMed .

          W. A. Barton and L. J. Lynch, International Conference on Coal Science, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  1991 Search PubMed .
T. Aida, J. Fuel Soc. Jpn., 1991, 70, 820 Search PubMed .
P. Redlich, W. R. Jackson and F. P. Larkins, Fuel, 1985, 64, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iino, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1–2 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Cody, A. Davis and P. G. Hatcher, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Carlson, Energy Fuels, 1992, 6, 771 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Wiser, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1975, 20, 122 Search PubMed .
P. R. Solomon, ACS Symp. Ser., 1981, 169, 61 CAS .
Y. Sanada, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Narkiewicz and J. P. Mathews, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 3104–3111 CrossRef CAS .

          D. D. Whitehurst, T. O. Mitchell and M. Farcasiu, Coal Liquefaction: the Chemistry and Technology of Thermal Processes, Academic Press, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .

          E. Gorin, Chemistry of Coal Utilization, Wiley, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .

          I. Mochida, K. Sakanishi, H. P. D. D. Eley and O. H. Werner, in Advances in Catalysis, Academic Press,  1994, vol. 40, pp. 39–85 Search PubMed .
I. Mochida, A. Yufu, K. Sakanishi and Y. Korai, Fuel, 1988, 67, 114–118 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, Y. Moriguchi, T. Shimohara, Y. Korai, H. Fujitsu and K. Takeshita, Fuel, 1983, 62, 471–473 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, A. K. Saini and Y. Yoneyama, Fuel, 2000, 79, 249–261 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, K. Hanaoka and M. Nomura, Fuel, 1989, 68, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Mills, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1976, 14, 69–82 CrossRef CAS .

          M. W. Haenel, Catalysis in Direct Coal Liquefaction, in Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Wiley VCH,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. P. Curran, R. T. Struck and E. Gorin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1967, 6, 166–173 CrossRef CAS .

          F. R. Mayo, J. G. Huntington and N. A. Kirshen, Organic Chemistry of Coal, ACS Symposium Series, American Chemical Society, Washington DC,  1978, vol. 71 Search PubMed .
L. W. Vernon, Fuel, 1980, 59, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Deno, B. A. Greigger, A. D. Jones, W. G. Rakitsky, D. D. Whitehurst and T. O. Mitchell, Fuel, 1980, 59, 701–703 CrossRef CAS .

          N. C. Deno, K. Curry, A. D. Jones and R. Minard, in Chemistry and Physics of Coal Utilization, ed. B. R. Cooper and L. Petrakis, Amer. Inst. Phys., New York,  1980, pp. 154–156 Search PubMed .
E. Kuhlmann, E. Boerwinkle and M. Orchin, Fuel, 1981, 60, 1002–1004 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Youtcheff and P. H. Given, Fuel, 1982, 61, 980–987 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Fuel and Energy Abstracts, 1996, 37, 178–178 Search PubMed .
K. Mae, C. Song, M. Shimada and K. Miura, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 975–980 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Tayler and H. N. S. Shafer, Fuel, 1980, 59, 487 CrossRef .
H. D. Frankilin, R. G. Cosway, W. A. Peters and J. B. Howard, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1983, 22, 39 CrossRef .
J. T. Joseph and T. R. Farrai, Fuel, 1992, 71, 75 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Serio, P. R. Solomon, E. Kroo, R. Bassilakis, R. Malhotra and D. MacMillan, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1990, 35, 61 Search PubMed .
I. Mochida, T. Shimohara, Y. Korai, H. Fujitsu and K. Takeshita, Fuel, 1983, 62, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miura, K. Mae, S. Asaoka, T. Yoshimura and K. Hashimoto, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 340 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chu, S. A. Cannon, R. H. Hauge and J. L. Margrave, Fuel, 1986, 65, 1740 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ofosu-Asante, L. M. Stock and R. F. Zabransky, Fuel, 1989, 68, 567 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Schlosberg, R. C. Neavel, P. S. Maa and M. L. Gorbaty, Fuel, 1980, 59, 45 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Saini, M. M. Coleman, C. Song and H. H. Schobert, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 328–330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, H. H. Schobert and P. G. Hatcher, Energy Fuels, 1992, 6, 326–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Buchanan, P. F. Britt and J. T. D. Skeen, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1994, 39, 22 Search PubMed .
P. F. Britt, W. S. Mungall and A. C. Buchanan, III, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 660 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Eskay, P. F. Britt and A. C. Buchanan, III, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 1278 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Manion, D. F. McMillen and R. Malhotra, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 776–788 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Eskay, P. F. Britt and A. C. Buchanan, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 1257–1261 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Buchanan, P. F. Britt, J. T. Skeen, J. A. Struss and C. L. Elam, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 9895–9903 CrossRef .
D. F. McMillen, R. Malhotra, S. J. Chang, S. E. Nigenda and G. A. St John, Fuel, 2004, 83, 1455 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kidder, P. F. Britt and A. C. Buchanan, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. McMillen and R. Malhotra, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 6757–6770 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shen, T. Takanohashi and M. Iino, Energy Fuels, 1992, 6, 854 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Bai, W. Li, H. Chen and B. Li, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 410–413 CrossRef CAS .

          S. E. Stein, Free Radicals in Coal Conversion, in Chemistry of Coal Conversion, ed. R. H. Schlosberg, Plenum Press, New York,  1985, pp. 13–44 Search PubMed .
M. L. Poutsma, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 113 CrossRef CAS .

          H. E. O'Neill and S. W. Benson, in Free Radicals, ed. J. Kochi, Wiley, New York,  1973, vol. II, ch. 17 Search PubMed .
S. W. Benson, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 1980, 12, 755 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Franz, T. Autrey, D. M. Camaioni, J. D. Watts and R. J. Bartlett, Coal Sci. Technol., 1995, 24, 1411–1414 Search PubMed .
R. Kuhn and W. Neugebauer, Monatsh. Chem., 1963, 94, 16 CrossRef CAS .

          H. L. Retcofsky, in Coal Science, ed. Gorbaty, et al., Academic press, New York,  1982, vol. 1, pp. 43–83 Search PubMed .
P. S. Virk, Fuel, 1979, 58, 149–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Hung and L. E. Stock, Fuel, 1982, 61, 1161–1163 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Narain, Fuel Process. Technol., 1985, 11, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Wham, Fuel, 1987, 66, 283–284 CrossRef CAS .
F. Derbyshire, A. Davis, M. Epstein and P. Stansberry, Fuel, 1986, 65, 1233–1239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inukai, S. Arita and H. Hirosue, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .

          P. R. Solomon, M. A. Serio, G. V. Deshpande, E. Kroo, H. H. Schobert and C. E. Burgess, in Coal Science II, ACS Symposium Series, ed. H. H. Schobert, K. D. Bartle and L. J. Lynch, American Chemical Society, Washington DC,  1991, vol. 461, pp. 193–212 Search PubMed .
L. Huang and H. H. Schobert, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, C. Song and H. H. Schobert, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1992, 37, 223 Search PubMed .
C. Song and H. H. Schobert, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1992, 37, 976 Search PubMed .
S. D. Brandes, R. A. Graff, M. L. Gorbaty and M. Siskin, Energy Fuels, 1989, 3, 494–498 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Graff and S. D. Brandes, Energy Fuels, 1987, 1, 84 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Bienkowski, R. Narayan, R. A. Greenkorn and K. Chao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1987, 26, 202 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ivanenko, R. A. Graff, V. BaloghNair and C. Brathwaite, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iino, T. Takanohashi, C. Li and H. Kumagai, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 1414–1418 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Mapstone, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 695–700 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, K. Iwamoto, T. Tahara, Y. Korai, H. Fujitsu and K. Takeshita, Fuel, 1982, 61, 603 CrossRef CAS .
M. Serio, E. Kroo and P. R. Solomon, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1992, 37, 432 Search PubMed .
M. A. Serio, E. Kroo, H. Teng and P. R. Solomon, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1993, 38, 577 Search PubMed .
M. A. Serio, E. Kroo, S. Chapeney and P. R. Solomon, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1993, 38, 1021 Search PubMed .
M. R. Khan, W. Chen and E. Suuberg, Energy Fuels, 1989, 3, 223 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ross and A. Hirschon, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1990, 35, 37 Search PubMed .
H. Shui, Z. Wang and G. Wang, Fuel, 2006, 85, 1798–1802 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Miknis, D. A. Netzel, T. F. Turner, J. C. Wallace and C. H. Butcher, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 631–640 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Vorres, D. L. Wertz, V. Malhotra, Y. Dang, J. T. Joseph and R. Fisher, Fuel, 1992, 71, 1047–1053 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Neavel, Fuel, 1976, 55, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Gorbaty, Fuel, 1978, 57, 796–797 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Cronauer, R. G. Ruberto, R. S. Silver, R. G. Jenkins, A. Davis and D. S. Hoover, Fuel, 1984, 63, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Vorres, R. Kolman and T. Griswold, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1988, 33, 333 Search PubMed .
C. Song, A. K. Saini and H. H. Schobert, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 301–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Joseph, Fuel, 1991, 70, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
L. Artok, A. Davis, G. D. Mitchell and H. H. Schobert, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 67–77 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brannan, C. W. Curtis and D. C. Cronauer, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 45, 53–67 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brannan, C. W. Curtis and D. C. Cronauer, Fuel Process. Technol., 1996, 48, 173–187 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, G. Sha and G. Chen, Fuel Process. Technol., 2000, 68, 33–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shui, Z. Wang and M. Cao, Fuel, 2008, 87, 2908–2913 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takanohashi, T. Yanagida, M. Iino and D. E. Mainwaring, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 1128–1132 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Joseph, Fuel, 1991, 70, 459–464 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinto, I. Gulyurtlu, L. S. Lobo and I. Cabrita, Fuel, 1999, 78, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Baldwin, D. R. Kennar, O. Nguanprasert and R. L. Miller, Fuel, 1991, 70, 429–433 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hodek and G. Kölling, Fuel, 1973, 52, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. T. Chan, W. R. Jackson and M. Marshall, Fuel, 1994, 73, 1628–1631 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nishioka, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 506–507 CrossRef CAS .
B. van Bodegom, J. A. R. van Veen, G. M. M. van Kessel, M. W. A. Sinnige-Nijssen and H. C. M. Stuiver, Fuel, 1984, 63, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Beasley, C. W. Curtis and J. N. Hool, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Given, D. C. Cronauer, W. Spackman, H. L. Lovell, A. Davis and B. Biswas, Fuel, 1975, 54, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Pullen, in Coal Science, ed. M. L. Gorbaty, J. W. Larsen and I. Wender, Academic Press, New York,  1983, vol. 2, pp. 173–288 Search PubMed .

          P. H. Given, W. Spackman, A. davis and R. G. Jenkins, in Coal Liquefaction Fundamentals, ACS Symposium Series, ed. D. D. Whitehurst, American Chemical society, Washington DC,  1980, vol. 139, pp. 3–34 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Clarke, G. Kimber, T. D. Rantell and D. E. Shipley, in Coal Liquefaction Fundamentals, ACS Symposium Series, ed. D. D. Whitehurst, American Chemical society, Washington DC,  1980, vol. 139, pp. 111–129 Search PubMed .
J. W. Stadelhofer and R. Gerhards, Fuel, 1981, 60, 367–368 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. van Heek, B. O. Strobel and W. Wanzl, Fuel, 1994, 73, 1135–1143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kabe, T. Horimatsu, A. Ishihara, H. Kameyama and K. Yamamoto, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Neavel, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1981, 300, 141 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Becker, J. G. Bendoraitis, M. G. Bloch and A. V. Cabal, Analytical Studies for the H-Coal Process, prepared for DOE, under contract no. EF-77-C-01-2676, Mobil Research and Development Corp., Paulsboro,  1979 Search PubMed .
B. H. Lee, W. L. Yoon and W. K. Lee, Fuel, 1994, 73, 1751–1756 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, A. Takerable and K. Takeshita, Fuel, 1979, 58, 17 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Derbyshire and D. D. Whitehurst, Fuel, 1981, 60, 655 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Derbyshire, P. Varghese and D. D. Whitehurst, Fuel, 1982, 61, 859–864 CrossRef CAS .
O. Okuma, K. Saito, A. Kawashima, K. Okazaki and Y. Nakako, Fuel Process. Technol., 1986, 14, 23–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Stein, Acc. Chem. Res., 1991, 24, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. King and L. M. Stock, Fuel, 1982, 61, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Malhotra and D. F. McMillen, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. McMillen, R. Malhotra, G. P. Hum and S. J. Chang, Energy Fuels, 1987, 1, 193 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Kabe, in Catalysis in Coal Liquefaction: New Directions for Research, ed. F. J. Derbyshire, IEA Coal Research, London, UK,  1988 Search PubMed .
D. F. McMillen, R. Malhotra, S. J. Chang, R. H. Fleming, W. C. Ogier and S. E. Nigenda, Fuel, 1987, 66, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, A. Takayama, R. Sakata and K. Sakanishi, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 398–401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Malhotra and D. F. McMillen, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Hei, P. G. Sweeny and V. I. Stenberg, Fuel, 1986, 65, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Cronauer, D. M. Jewell, Y. T. Shah and R. J. Modi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam., 1979, 18, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. McMillen, R. Malhotra, S.-J. Chang, W. C. Ogier, S. E. Nigenda and R. H. Fleming, Fuel, 1987, 66, 1611–1620 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Hu, L. Jin and H. Hu, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 1126–1129 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chawla, H. A. Dabbagh and B. H. Davis, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Godo, A. Ishihara and T. Kabe, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 724–729 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meyer, P. Oviawe, D. Nicole and J. C. Lauer, Fuel, 1990, 69, 1317–1321 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Oviawe, D. Nicole and J. L. Fringant, Fuel, 1993, 72, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Oviawe, D. Nicole and R. Gerardin, Fuel, 1995, 74, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Skowronski, J. J. Ratto, I. B. Goldberg and L. A. Heredy, Fuel, 1984, 63, 440–448 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ouchi and M. Makabe, Fuel, 1988, 67, 1536–1541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohe, H. Itoh, M. Makabe and K. Ouchi, Fuel, 1985, 64, 902–905 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, E. Ogata, Z. Zong, S. Zhou, Z. Qin, J. Liu, K. Shen and H. Li, Fuel Process. Technol., 2000, 62, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Godo, M. Saito, A. Ishihara and T. Kabe, Fuel, 1998, 77, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .

          F. J. Derbyshire, Catalysis in Coal Liquefaction, IEA Coal Research, London,  1988 Search PubMed .
H. Charcosset, R. Bacaud, M. Besson, A. Jeunet, B. Nickel and M. Oberson, Fuel Process. Technol., 1986, 12, 189–201 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Derbyshire, A. Davis, R. Lin, P. G. Stansberry and M. T. Terrer, Fuel Process. Technol., 1986, 12, 127–141 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, K. Sakanishi, N. Suzuki, M. Sakurai, Y. Tsukui and T. Kaneko, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1998, 2, 17–30 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Keogh and B. H. Davis, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 289–293 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bacaud, M. Besson and G. Djega-Mariadassou, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 3–9 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Cebolla, M. Diack, D. Cagniant, M. Oberson, R. Bacaud and B. Nickel-Pepin-Donat, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
F. Derbyshire and T. Hager, Fuel, 1994, 73, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Stencel, P. C. Eklund, X.
X. Bi and F. J. Derbyshire, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 285–306 CrossRef CAS .

          X. X. Bi and P. C. Eklund, Proceedings of Materials Research Society Fall 1991 Meeting, Boston, MA,  1992 Search PubMed .
V. R. Pradhan, J. Hu, J. W. Tierney and I. Wender, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1993, 38, 8 Search PubMed .
A. Martino, J. P. Wilcoxon and J. S. Kawola, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 1289–1295 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Matson, J. C. Linehan, J. G. Darab and M. F. Buehler, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Cugini, D. Krastman, R. F. Hickey and V. D. Balsone, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1991, 36, 91 Search PubMed .
Y. Watanabe, O. Yamada, K. Fujita, Y. Takegami and T. Suzuki, Fuel, 1984, 63, 752–755 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yamada, T. Suzuki, J. H. Then, T. Ando and Y. Watanabe, Fuel Process. Technol., 1985, 11, 297–311 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pradhan, D. E. Herrick, J. W. Tierney and I. Wender, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 712–720 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kanno, M. Kimura, N.-o. Ikenaga and T. Suzuki, Energy Fuels, 2000, 14, 612–617 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Cugini, D. Krastman, R. G. Lett and V. D. Balsone, Catal. Today, 1994, 19, 395–407 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Guin, X. Zhan and R. S. Linhart, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Cugini, D. Krastman, D. V. Martello, E. F. Frommell, A. W. Wells and G. D. Holder, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Taghiei, F. E. Huggins, V. Mahajan and G. P. Huffman, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakami, H. Shirato, N. Hanada and Y. Nishiyama, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 843–848 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, K. Tazawa, T. Koyama, K. Satou, K. Shimasaki and Y. Kageyama, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 897–904 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, K. Tazawa, N. Okuyama, M. Tamura and K. Shimasaki, Fuel, 2000, 79, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, S. Sugita, M. Tamura, K. Shimasaki, E. Makino and L. H. Silalahi, Fuel, 2002, 81, 1541–1549 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Pradhan, J. W. Tierney, I. Wender and G. P. Huffman, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 497–507 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hattori, T. Yamaguchi, K. Tanabe, S. Yokoyama, J. Umematsu and Y. Sanada, Fuel Process. Technol., 1984, 8, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ibrahim and M. S. Seehra, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Hager, A. L. Compton, E. N. Givens and F. J. Derbyshire, Prepr. Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 1994, 39, 1083–1087 Search PubMed .
D. Tian, R. K. Sharma, A. H. Stiller, C. D. Stinespring and D. B. Dadyburjor, Fuel, 1996, 75, 751–758 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. Feng, F. E. Huggins and G. P. Huffman, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, J. S. MacFadden, A. H. Stiller and D. B. Dadyburjor, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, A. H. Stiller and D. B. Dadyburjor, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakao, S. Yokoyama, Y. Maekawa and K. Kaeriyama, Fuel, 1984, 63, 721–722 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shah, J. Zhao, F. E. Huggins and G. P. Huffman, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 417–420 CrossRef CAS .
N.-o. Ikenaga, H. Taniguchi, A. Watanabe and T. Suzuki, Fuel, 2000, 79, 273–283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yokoyama, R. Yoshida, H. Narita, K. Kodaira and Y. Maekawa, Fuel, 1986, 65, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Sweeny, V. I. Stenberg, R. D. Hei and P. A. Montano, Fuel, 1987, 66, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .
F. Derbyshire, Energy Fuels, 1989, 3, 273–277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chadha, C. D. Stinespring, A. H. Stiller, J. W. Zondlo and D. B. Dadyburjor, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 284–295 CrossRef CAS .

          H. H. Storch, in Chemistry of Coal Utilization, ed. H. H. Lowry, Wiley, New York,  1945, ch. 38 Search PubMed .
N. Ikenaga, Y. Kobayashi, S. Saeki, T. Sakota, Y. Watanabe, H. Yamada and T. Suzuki, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Joseph, Fuel, 1991, 70, 459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vittal and A. L. Boehman, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 1028–1029 CrossRef CAS .
B. Demirel and E. N. Givens, Fuel Process. Technol., 2000, 64, 177–187 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gozmen, L. Artok, G. Erbatur and O. Erbatur, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1040–1047 CrossRef .
L. Artok, A. Davis, G. D. Mitchell and H. H. Schobert, Fuel, 1992, 71, 981–991 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lastra, R. Garcia and S. R. Moinelo, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schroeder, B. Bockrath, R. Miller and H. Davis, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 221–226 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Warzinski and B. C. Bockrath, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 612–622 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Chamberlin and H. H. Schobert, Fuel Process. Technol., 1991, 28, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
B. Demirel and E. N. Givens, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 607–611 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, D. S. Parfitt and H. H. Schobert, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, J. Bai, S. Guo and G. Chen, Fuel, 2002, 81, 1521–1524 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Song, A. K. Saini and J. McConnie, in Coal Science and Technology, ed. J. A. Pajares and J. M. D. Tascón, Elsevier,  1995, vol. 24, pp. 1391–1394 Search PubMed .
C. Song and A. K. Saini, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 188–189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoneyama and C. Song, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 767–773 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Shui, D. Zhang and J. Gao, Fuel, 2007, 86, 835–842 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Shui, Y. Zhu and J. Gao, Fuel, 2009, 88, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, M. R. Bruce, E. H. Edelson and A. Husain, Fuel, 1984, 63, 1130–1137 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Taylor and A. T. Bell, Fuel, 1980, 59, 499–506 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Heredy, A. E. Kostyo and M. B. Neuworth, Fuel, 1965, 44, 125–133 CAS .
K. Ouchi, K. Imuta and Y. Yamashita, Fuel, 1973, 52, 156–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Siskin and J. Porcelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974, 96, 3640–3641 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fraenkel, V. R. Pradhan, J. W. Tierney and I. Wender, Fuel, 1991, 70, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu, H. Karamatsu, Y. Iwami, A. Inaba, A. Suganuma and I. Saito, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 45, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nomura, T. Muratani, Y. Tajima and S. Murata, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 43, 213–225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mashimo, J. Suezawa, N. Masumoto, K. Miwa, K. Takido and T. Wainai, Fuel, 1986, 65, 495–499 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Haenel, J. Narangerel, U.-B. Richter and A. Rufi, nacute and ska, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1061–1066 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyake, T. Kagajyo and M. Nomura, Fuel Process. Technol., 1984, 9, 293–306 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Mobley and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 1980, 64, 494–496 CrossRef CAS .

          R. T. Struck and C. W. Zielke, Industrial Conversion of Coal and Carbon to Gas, Liquid and High Value Solid Products, Society for Chemical Industry,  1981 Search PubMed .
C. Song, M. Nomura and M. Miyake, Fuel, 1986, 65, 922–926 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song and M. nomura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1986, 59, 3643–3648 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, K. Hanaoka and M. Nomura, Energy Fuels, 1988, 2, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Topsoe and H. Topsoe, J. Catal., 1983, 84, 386 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, J. Adjaye and A. E. Nelson, Appl. Catal., A: Gen., 2004, 263, 131–143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prins, V. H. J. De Beer and G. A. Somorjai, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1989, 31, 1 CAS .
L. S. Byskov, J. K. Norskov, B. S. Clausen and H. Topsoe, J. Catal., 1999, 187, 109 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. A. M. Bouwens, J. A. R. Van Veen, D. C. Koningsberger, V. H. J. De Beer and R. Prins, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 123–134 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu, D. S. Sholl and A. V. Cugini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 239–249 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu, D. S. Sholl and A. V. Cugini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1988–2000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Helveg, J. V. Lauritsen, S. Laegsgaards, I. Stensgaard, J. K. Norskov, B. S. Clausen, H. Topsoe and F. Besenbacher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 951 CrossRef CAS .

          S. W. Weller, Coal Liquefaction with Molybdenum Catalysts, 4th International conference on Chemistry and uses of Molybdenum, Golden, Colorado,  1982 Search PubMed .
P. N. Ho and S. W. Weller, Fuel Process. Technol., 1981, 4, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shimada, M. Kurita, T. Sato, Y. Yoshimura, T. Kawakami, S. Yoshitomi and A. Nishijima, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1984, 57, 2000–2004 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, T. Nihonmatsu and M. Nomura, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1991, 30, 1726–1734 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Tischer, N. K. Narain, G. J. Stiegel and D. L. Cillo, J. Catal., 1985, 95, 406–413 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, K. Hanaoka and M. Nomura, Energy Fuels, 1992, 6, 619–628 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Reddy, B. Wei and C. Song, Catal. Today, 1998, 43, 261–272 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Stiegel, R. E. Tischer, D. L. Cillo and N. K. Narain, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1985, 24, 206–213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, P. D. Jacobs, H. W. Haynes and A. J. Swanson, Fuel, 1995, 74, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Nishijima, H. Shimada, Y. Yoshimura, T. Sato and N. Matsubayashi, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. B. Delmon and G. F. Froment, Elsevier,  1987, vol. 34, pp. 39–58 Search PubMed .
T. Masuyama, Y. Kageyama and S. Kawai, Fuel, 1990, 69, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakanishi, H.-u. Hasuo, M. Kishino, I. Mochida and O. Okuma, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 216–219 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakanishi, H. Taniguchi, H.-u. Hasuo and I. Mochida, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 306–309 CrossRef CAS .
U. Priyanto, K. Sakanishi, O. Okuma and I. Mochida, Fuel Process. Technol., 2002, 79, 51–62 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, X. Ma, C. Song, Y.-K. Lee and S. T. Oyama, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 353–364 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Thakur and M. G. Thomas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1984, 23, 349–360 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Stiegel, L. M. Polinski and R. E. Tischer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1982, 21, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Wanke and P. C. Flynn, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1975, 12, 93–135 CAS .
M. Sugano, R. Ikemizu and K. Mashimo, Fuel Process. Technol., 2002, 77–78, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirano, Fuel Process. Technol., 2000, 62, 109–118 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Thakur and M. G. Thomas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1984, 23, 349–360 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Ruberto and D. C. Cronauer, Fuel Process. Technol., 1979, 2, 215–219 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Ruberto, D. C. Cronauer and L. G. Galya, Fuel Process. Technol., 1981, 5, 103–118 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Bockrath and R.
P. Noceti, Fuel Process. Technol., 1979, 2, 143–153 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Shadle and P. H. Given, Fuel, 1982, 61, 972–979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, N. Xiao, J. Qiu, Y. Sun, T. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang and N. Tsubaki, Fuel, 2008, 87, 3474–3476 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Dadyburjor, T. E. Fout and J. W. Zondlo, Catal. Today, 2000, 63, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rana, V. Sámano, J. Ancheyta and J. A. I. Diaz, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1216–1231 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, S. Eser, H. H. Schobert and P. G. Hatcher, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 234–243 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, C. R. Acad. Sci., 2000, 3, 477–496 Search PubMed .
C. Song, CATTECH, 2002, 6, 64–77 CrossRef CAS .

          N.R.C. Committee on the Strategic Assessment of the U.S. Department of Energy's Coal Program, Coal: Energy for the Future, National Academic Press, Washington DC,  1995 Search PubMed .

          J. Lepinski, T. Lee and S. Tam, ACS Spring National Meeting, Utah,  2009 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Sivakumar Vasireddy	Dr Sivakumar Vasireddy was born in 1976, Guntur, India and received his MSc in Chemistry from Andhra University, India in 1999. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India in 2007 under the guidance of Dr K. S. Rama Rao, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, India. He was a postdoctoral fellow in the groups of Prof. D. B. Tkatchenko, Universite de Bourgogne, France and Prof. James J Spivey, Louisiana State University, USA. He is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. W. Zmierczak's research group at University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA. His research interests include heterogeneous catalysis, catalyst characterization, syngas chemistry CO2 valorization and methane activation.
Bryan Morreale	Dr Bryan Morreale is the interim Materials Science and Engineering Focus Area Lead within the Office of Research and Development at the US DOE's National Energy Technology Laboratory. He currently leads activities across a diverse research portfolio related to both structural and functional materials for advanced energy conversion applications, specifically focused on advanced gasification, advanced combustion and minimizing environmental impacts. Dr Morreale is an alumnus of the University of Pittsburgh, where he received his PhD from the Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, with a research focus on the development of materials for hydrogen separation. Dr Morreale's tenure at NETL began in 1999, where he has had the opportunity to support the NETL Office of Research and Development as well as the NETL Strategic Center for Coal. Dr Morreale's research has focused on energy conversion and conservation technologies: specifically gasification, gas separations, membrane reactors, synthesis gas conversion, liquefaction and carbon utilization.
Anthony Cugini	Dr Anthony Cugini is the Director of the US Department of Energy's (DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory with responsibility to oversee and manage all activities at the laboratory. He has been with NETL since 1987, during which time he created and directed the lab's Computational and Basic Sciences Focus Area from 2001–2007. He served as division director of the Fuels and Process Chemistry Division from 1999–2001. He has had a range of research interests over a wide cross-section of energy and environmental technologies, including the kinetics of exothermic reactions, catalyst development, advanced carbon synthesis, hydrogen production and separation, gas hydrates, CO2 sequestration and computational modeling.
Chunshan Song	Dr Chunshan Song is a Distinguished Professor of Fuel Science in the Department of Energy and Mineral Engineering, a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Director of EMS Energy Institute at the Pennsylvania State University. His research interests include catalysis and adsorption for fuel processing, adsorption desulfurization and reforming of hydrocarbons and biofuels for fuel cells, shape-selective catalysis, CO2 capture and utilization, heavy oil upgrading, and conversion of coal and biomass to fuels and chemicals. He has 200 refereed publications, delivered 40 plenary or keynote lectures, and received Henry H. Storch Award in Fuel Chemistry from American Chemical Society.
James J. Spivey	Prof. Spivey is the Shivers 2 Professor of Chemical Engineering at Louisiana State University, and Director of LSU's Center for Atomic-level Catalyst Design, a Dept. of Energy Center which focuses on development of computational and experiment tools for heterogeneous catalysts. He also serves as Editor of the Catalysis book series (Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK) and is Associate Editor of Catalysis Today (Elsevier).

Broader context
The vast worldwide reserves of coal provide a significant incentive for the development of competitive processes to convert this resource into clean liquid fuels. Virtually all projections of energy usage show increasing demand for coal-based energy (e.g., Energy Information Administration/International Energy Outlook 2007). This is particularly true in the US and China, where coal is the dominant fossil energy resource. Among the proven processes to produce liquid fuels from coal, direct coal liquefaction (DCL) must be considered seriously in any strategic plan for coal utilization. DCL technology is essentially the catalytic hydrogenation of coal. The extremely complex and variable chemical and physical properties of coal make it difficult to understand the true fundamental processes that take place in a DCL process. Here, we examine these fundamentals, including catalytic chemistry, solvent effects, pretreatment, and reactor design, as well as challenges for the further development of DCL.


Australia	46.9	43.6	90.5
Canada	3.8	3.4	7.2
China	68.6	57.6	126.2
Germany	25.3	47.4	72.7
India	90.8	2.2	92.8
Poland	22.4	2.0	24.4
Russia	54.1	119	173.1
South Africa	54.6	—	54.6
UK	1.1	0.5	1.1
USA	126.8	146.8	273.6
Ukraine	17.9	19.7	37.6
nCH0.8 + xH2 → (–CH2–)n
CH0.8 + H2O/O2 → CO + H2 → (–CH2–) + H2O


Scale/t d−1	150	200	250	200	50	1 Mt y−1	2.5
R&D step	Pilot	Pilot	Pilot	PDU pilot	Pilot	Commercial	Pilot
Reactor/catalyst	2–4% Fe	Co–Mo/Al2O3 and Ni–Mo/Al2O3	Noncatalytic	Fe catalyst (red mud)	Fe slurry Ca–Ni–Mo	Fe Gelcat-1st stage 2-stage ebullated reactor Ni–Mo/Al2O3	Noncatalytic (1st stage) ebullated-bed reactor (2nd stage)
Temperature, pressure	435–465 °C, 150–200 atm	435–465 °C, 200 atm	425–450 °C, 175 atm	470 °C, 300 atm	427–448 °C, 360–400 °C, 150–200 atm	430 °C 435–440 °C, 170 atm	410–440 °C, 10–20 atm; 400–440 °C, 200 atm
Yield (%)
Hydrocarbon gases (C1–C4)	16.9	10.5	5	19.0	13.6	—	15.4
Light oil (C5—200 °C)	28.8	13.3	14	25.3	36.7	60–65	49.9
Middle oil (200–325 °C)	19.3	19.7	10	32.6	15.1	—	12.4
Unreacted coal and pitch	18.8	37.1	48	22.1	8.1	7–22	24.7
Characteristic	Need upgrading	Reload catalyst during reaction	
	
	Using brown coal (moisture 60%)	First DCL plant	


 	Fig. 1  Ebullated catalytic bed reactor.19	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Process flow for catalytic two-stage direct liquefaction (CTSL) developed by HTI and DOE in USA. Source: Comolli and Zhou, DOE report under contract no. AC22-92PC92148, January 2000. (b) A flow diagram of the Shenhua Direct Coal Liquefaction plant, China. Source: X. Ren, Presented on Nov 2007 for IEA, http://www.iea.org/textbase/work/2007/neet_beijing/Renxiangkun_en.pdf.	 

 		 



Increasing pressure, temperature and time	Peat	60	6	34	0.5	—	Increasing aromatization and loss of oxygen 
Lignite	70	5	25	0.7	5500–8300
Subbituminous	75	5	20	0.78	8300–13 000
Bituminous	85	5	10	0.84	11 000–15 000
Anthracite	94	3	3	0.98	13 500–15 600

 	Fig. 3  Coal rank vs. oxygen functional groups and aromaticity.	 

 	Fig. 4  Model of bituminous coal structure.30	 




	

	




	

	
Thiols

R–S–H aliphatic
R–S–R′ aliphatic


	

	
Sulfides

Ar–S–R and Ar–S–Ar aromatic
R–S–S–R′ aliphatic

Disulfides

Ar–S–S–R and Ar–S–S–Ar aromatic


	

	
Thiophenes

R–O–R	


R–(CO)–R
R–COOR

Shale	Muscovite	(K,Na,H3O,Ca)2(Al,Mg,Fe,Ti)4
Hydromuscovite	(Al,Si)8O20(OH,F)4
Illite	(HO)4K2(Si6,Al2)Al4O20
Bravaisite	

Montmorillonite	Na2(Al,Mg)Si4O10(OH)2
Kaolin	Kaolinite	Al2(Si2O5)(OH)4
Livesite	

Metalloysite	

Sulfide	Pyrite	FeS2
Marcasite	

Carbonate	Ankerite	

Ankeritic calcite	(Ca,Mg,Fe,Mn)CO3
Ankeritic dolomite	

Ankeritic chalybite	

Chloride	Sylvite	KCl
Halite	NaCl
Oxides	Quartz	SiO2
Hematite	Fe2O3

 	Fig. 5  Non-associated (left), associated (middle) and combined (right) molecular network structures.59	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular representation of Pocahontas No. 3 coal proposed by Narkiewicz and Mathews.80	 

 	Fig. 7  H/C ratios of various hydrocarbon sources.	 
CH0.8S0.2O0.1N0.01 + xH2 → CH2 + CO2, H2S, NH3, H2O	(1)

 	Scheme 1  Reaction model for coal liquefaction. TF: thermal fragmentation; HD: hydrogen donation by hydrogen in coal, vehicle and gas-phase H2; PreAsp: preasphaltenes; Asp: asphaltenes; PRIOM: promptly re-crosslinked or repolymerized insoluble organic materials; Oil: oils are hexane- or pentane-soluble products including light distillates.	 

 	Scheme 2  Recombination of phenoxy radical through carbon with a benzyl radical leading to benzyl phenol.	 

 	Scheme 3  Radical displacement reactions leading to retrogressive products.118	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

H˙	104.2	

	




	Ḣ + RH → H2 + Ṙ
OH˙	112	

	ȮH + RH → H2O + Ṙ
Ar˙	112, 106	

	





Alkyl˙	90–100	R˙ + alkyl H → alkyl˙ + RH	Isomerization, β-bond scission
(A) Keq(2R˙ ⇌ R2) ≫ 1
(1) Benzylic, no weak β-bonds	


(2) Benzylic, weak β-bonds
(a) Weak β-H bonds
R–H = olefin—not convertible to polyaromatic	


R–H = olefin—convertible to polyaromatic	


R–H = polyaromatic	


(a) Weak β-C bonds	


(3) Phenoxylic, no weak β-bonds	


(4) Phenoxylic, weak β-bonds	


(5) Sulfur centered	


(B) Keq(2Ṙ ⇌ R2) ≲ 1
(1) Triarylmethyl and ortho-substituted diphenylmethyl radicals	


(2) Blocked phenoxylic	


(3) Phenalenylic	


	(5)

 		 
	(6)

 	Fig. 8  Comparing product distributions for no preliquefaction with preliquefaction at 275 °C and at 350 °C followed by liquefaction at 425 °C.134Liquefaction conditions: 425 °C, catalyst—Mo, solvent—naphthalene, H2 atmosphere, 10 min. Preliquefaction conditions: catalyst—Mo, solvent—naphthalene, H2, 30 min at 275 °C, 60 min at 350 °C.	 


Raw coal	55.5	20.8	12.0	22.8
TOL(+)	57.4	23.4	12.0	22.1
TOL(−)	61.8	24.1	11.4	26.3
THN(+)	59.1	10.6	13.2	35.2
THN(−)	64.6	23.8	13.7	27.1
NMP(+)	61.2	4.1	16.4	40.7
NMP(−)	64.9	18.3	15.0	31.6

 	Fig. 9  Dependence of conversion on coal rank.176 *dmmf = dry, mineral-matter free.	 

 	Fig. 10  Dependence of liquefaction yields on coal rank (carbon and oxygen content).89,178 Pressure—30 Mpa, temperature—465 to 470 °C; 4% minerals in feed coals, ■ and ●—carbon content; □ and ○—oxygen content; DAF—dry and ash free.	 

 	Fig. 11  Effect of coal rank on liquefaction yields of residue and SRC at different temperatures.179 Datong—● and ▲; Wandoan—◑ and ; Morwell—○ and △; residue—●, ◑ and ○; SRC—▲,  and △. Reaction time 2 h.	 

 	Scheme 4  Conventional mechanism: H-donor solvent stabilizes thermally generated radicals.189	 

 	Scheme 5  Solvent mediated hydrogenolysis: solvent engenders bond scission.189	 

 	Scheme 6  Cleavage of strong bonds engendered by H transfer to ipso position.194	 
R˙ + H2S → RH + ˙SH	(7)
˙SH + H2 → H2S + H˙	(8)

 	Scheme 7  Catalyst mediated hydrogen transfer model in coal liquefaction.198	 

 	Fig. 12  Coal liquefaction catalyst testing model compound, naphthylbibenzylmethane.	 

Catalyst sample no.	Identified phase(s)	Model compd consumed (%) (±4%)	Bond cleavage selectivityb (%) (±3%)
No catalyst	
	<5	40–60
Sulfur only	
	<20	50–70

RTDS products

62-79-4	Hematite	23	83
54-53-5	2-Line ferrihydrite	20	84
54-50-3	Hematite/6-line ferrihydrite	81	96
48-20-1	6-Line ferrihydrite	90	96
48-19-7	6-Line ferrihydrite	>90c	96
54-54-2	Magnetite	>90	98
54-56-1	Ferric oxyhydroxysulfate	>90	94
54-56-4	Ferric oxyhydroxysulfate	>90	96

MRM products

MRM-7-2	2-Line ferrihydrite	51	91
MRM-39-39	2-Line ferrihydrite	41	90
MRM-7-2A	Magnetite/maghemite	77	89
MRM-39-39A	Maghemite	32	92
MRM-39-39	Goethite/lepidocrocite	44	93

 	Fig. 13  Effect of catalysts on coal conversion. Microautoclave screening tests with 2:1 tetralin: Illinois No. 6 coal, 425 °C, 1 h, 1000 psi H2,227 425 °C, 0.5 h, 1000 psig (cold) of H2, 5000 ppm Fe, 0.1 g of S added to 9.9 g of a 2:l mixture of PANASOL to coal.	 



Blind Canyon

None	58	30
Physically mixed FeOOH	66	34
Impregnated FeOOH	85	41

Illinois No. 6

None	53	25
Physically mixed FeOOH	67	40
Impregnated FeOOH	83	50

Black Thunder

None	54	30
Physically mixed FeOOH	64	35
Impregnated FeOOH	79	39
Fe2(SO4)3 + 3(NH4)2MoS4 → Fe2(MoS4)3 + 3(NH4)2SO4	(9)

 	Fig. 14  Effect of reaction temperature on conversion of DECS-8 Wyodak coal with ATTM in the presence and absence of added water without using organic solvent.86	 

 	Fig. 15  Effect of water addition on liquefaction of DECS-8 Wyodak coal at 350 °C for 30 min using ATTM loaded on the fresh raw coal (Raw), vacuum-dried coal (VD) and air-dried coal (AD) without any organic solvent. Cat means catalyst precursor ATTM.86	 

 	Fig. 16  Comparison of the products obtained from the one-stage and two-stage liquefaction of low volatile bituminous coal.278 The 13C CP-MAS NMR signals indicate Caliph/Carom.	 

 	Scheme 8  Bond scission promoted by ZnCl2.	 
ZnCl2 + NH3 → ZnCl2·NH3	(10)
ZnCl2 + H2S → ZnS + 2HCl	(11)

 	Fig. 17  Influence of loading level of (A) MoCl3–LiCl–KCl, (B) NiCl2–LiCl–KCl, and (C) LiCl–KCl on coal conversion.284	 

 	Fig. 18  Relation between MPD and conversion of BI and asphaltenes fractions from hydroprocessing over carbon-coated and fresh Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts.298	 

 	Fig. 19  Effect of catalyst MPD on oxygen contents of oil and asphaltenes products from hydroprocessing over fresh () and carbon-coated () Ni–Mo/Al2O3.298	 

 	Fig. 20  Effects of MPD of Ni–Mo/Al2O3 catalysts on the sulfur and oxygen contents of oil and asphaltene products from hydroprocessing of sulfur rich asphaltenes.298	 

 	Scheme 9  4,6-Dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT) hydrodesulfurization (HDS) via a ring hydrogenation network (denoted by the rate constant k1) and a direct C–S bond hydrogenolysis network (denoted by the rate constant k2).307	 

 	Fig. 21  Effect of acidic properties of catalysts on the formation of coke-like substances. Modified from T. Masuyama et al., Fuel, 1990, 69, 245.	 

 	Scheme 10  Solvent fractionation of non-distillable coal products.	 

Product mix	65% Diesel and 35% naphtha	

Diesel cetane	42–47	>40
Diesel sulfur	<5 ppm	<15 ppm
Diesel aromatics	4.8 wt%	<35%
Diesel specific gravity	0.865	

Naphtha octane (RON)	>100	

Naphtha sulfur	<0.5 ppm	

Naphtha aromatics	5 wt%	

Naphtha specific gravity	0.764	

Thermal efficiency (%)	60–70	


Motor gasoline	70	24	6	0
Diesel fuel	50	11	39	0
Jet fuel	13	11	13	63

 	Fig. 22  Value added chemicals and monomers of advanced polymer materials from DCL derived one- to four-ring aromatic compounds.323	 

 	Fig. 23  Carbon footprint in DCL plant.325	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
